license to return and build the temple in Jerusalem: and restoreth the
holy vessels which Nabuchodonosor had taken from thence.
In the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, that the word of
the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred
up the spirit of Cyrus king of the Persians: and he made a proclamation
throughout all his kingdom, and in writing also, saying:
Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians: The Lord the God of heaven
hath given to me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he hath charged me
to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judea.
Who is there among you of all his people? His God be with him. Let
him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judea, and build the house of the
And let all the rest in all places wheresoever they dwell, help him
every man from his place, with silver and gold, and goods, and cattle,
besides that which they offer freely to the temple of God, which is in
Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Juda and Benjamin, and the
priests, and Levites, and every one whose spirit God had raised up, to
go up to build the temple of the Lord, which was in Jerusalem.
And all they that were round about, helped their hands with vessels
of silver, and gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with furniture,
besides what they had offered on their own accord.
And king Cyrus brought forth vessels of the temple of the Lord,
which Nabuchodonosor had taken from Jerusalem, and had put them in the
temple of his god.
Now Cyrus king of Persia brought them forth by the hand of
prince of Juda.
And this is the number of them: thirty bowls of gold, a thousand
bowls of silver, nine and twenty knives, thirty cups of gold,
Silver cups of a second sort, four hundred and ten: other vessels
a thousand.
All the vessels of gold and silver, five thousand four hundred:
all these Sassabasar brought with them that came up from the captivity
of Babylon to Jerusalem.
Now these are the children of the province, that went out of the
captivity, which Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had carried away to
Who came with Zorobabel, Josue, Nehemia, Saraia, Rahelaia,
of the people of Israel:
The children of Pharos two thousand one hundred seventy-two.
The children of Sephatia, three hundred seventy-two.
The children of Area, seven hundred seventy-five.
The children of Phahath Moab, of the children of Josue: Joab, Two
thousand eight hundred twelve.
The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four.
The children of Zethua, nine hundred forty-five.
The children of Zachai, seven hundred sixty.
The children of Bani, six hundred forty-two.
The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty-three.
The children of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty-two.
The children of Adonicam, six hundred sixty-six.
The children of Beguai, two thousand fifty-six.
The children of Adin, four hundred fifty-four.
The children of Ather, who were of Ezechias, ninety-eight.
The children of Besai, three hundred and twenty-three.
The children of Jora, a hundred and twelve.
The children of Hasum, two hundred twenty-three.
The children of Gebbar, ninety-five.
The children of Bethlehem, a hundred twenty-three.
The men of Netupha, fifty-six.
The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty-eight.
The children of Azmaveth, forty-two.
The children of Cariathiarim, Cephira, and Beroth, seven hundred
forty-three.
The children of Rama and Gabaa, six hundred twenty-one.
The men of Machmas, a hundred twenty-two.
The men of Bethel and Hai, two hundred twenty-three.
The children of Nebo, fifty-two.
The children of Megbis, a hundred fifty-six.
The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-five.
The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.
The children of Lod, Hadid and Ono, seven hundred twenty-five.
The children of Jericho, three hundred forty-five.
The children of Senaa, three thousand six hundred thirty.
The priests: the children of Jadaia of the house of Josue, nine
hundred seventy-three.
The children of Emmer, a thousand fifty-two.
The children of Pheshur, a thousand two hundred forty-seven.
The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.
The Levites: the children of Josue and of Cedmihel, the children
of Odovia, seventy-four.
The singing men: the children of Asaph, a hundred twenty-eight.
The children of the porters: the children of Sellum, the children
of Ater, the children of Telmon, the children of Accub, the children of
The Nathinites: the children of Siha, the children of Hasupha, the
children of Tabbaoth,
The children of Ceros, the children of Sia, the children of
The children of Lebana, the children of Hegaba, the children of
The children of Hagab, the children of Semlai, the children of
The children of Gaddel, the children of Gaher, the children of
The children of Rasin, the children of Necoda, the children of
The children of Asa, the children of Phasea, the children of
The children of Asena, the children of Munim, the children of
The children of Bacbuc, the children of Hacupha, the children of
The children of Besluth, the children of Mahida, the children of
The children of Bercos, the children of Sisara, the children of
The children of Nasia, the children of Hatipha,
The children of the servants of Solomon, the children of Sotai,
the children of Sopheret, the children of Pharuda,
The children of Jala, the children of Dercon, the children of
The children of Saphatia, the children of Hatil, the children of
All the Nathinites, and the children of the servants of Solomon,
three hundred ninety-two.
And these are they that came up from Thelmela, Thelharsa, Cherub,
and Adon, and Emer. And they could not shew the house of their fathers
and their seed, whether they were of Israel.
The children of Dalaia, the children of Tobia, the children of
And of the children of the priests: the children of Hobia, the
children of Accos, the children of Berzellai, who took a wife of the
daughters of Berzellai, the Galaadite, and was called by their name:
These sought the writing of their genealogy, and found it not, and
they were cast out of the priesthood.
And Athersatha said to them, that they should not eat of the holy
of holies, till there arose a priest learned and perfect.
All the multitudes as one man, were forty-two thousand three
hundred and sixty:
of Juda, Benjamin, and Levi, fall short of this number.  The rest, who
must be taken in to make up the whole sum, were of the other tribes.
Besides their men-servants, and women-servants, of whom there were
seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven: and among them singing
men, and singing women two hundred.
Their horses seven hundred thirty-six, their mules two hundred
forty-five,
Their camels four hundred thirty-five, their asses six thousand
seven hundred and twenty.
And some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the temple
of the Lord, which is in Jerusalem, offered freely to the house of the
According to their ability, they gave towards the expenses of the
work, sixty-one thousand solids of gold, five thousand pounds of silver,
and a hundred garments for the priests.
So the priests and the Levites, and some of the people, and the
singing men, and the porters, and the Nathinites dwelt in their cities,
and all Israel in their cities.
celebrated, and the foundations of the temple are laid.
And now the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel were
in their cities: and the people gathered themselves together as one man
to Jerusalem.
And Josue the son of Josedec rose up, and his brethren the priests,
and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and his brethren, and they built the
altar of the God of Israel that they might offer holocausts upon it, as
it is written in the law of Moses the man of God.
at that time.
And they set the altar of God upon its bases, while the people of
the lands round about put them in fear, and they offered upon it a
holocaust to the Lord morning and evening.
And they kept the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and
offered the holocaust every day orderly according to the commandment,
the duty of the day in its day.
And afterwards the continual holocaust, both on the new moons, and
on all the solemnities of the Lord, that were consecrated, and on all in
which a freewill offering was made to the Lord.
From the first day of the seventh month they began to offer
holocausts to the Lord: but the temple of God was not yet founded.
And they gave money to hewers of stones and to masons: and meat and
drink, and oil to the Sidonians and Tyrians, to bring cedar trees from
the Persians had given them.
And in the second year of their coming to the temple of God in
the son of Josedec, and the rest of their brethren the priests, and the
and they appointed Levites from twenty years old and upward, to hasten
forward the work of the Lord.
Then Josue and his sons and his brethren, Cedmihel, and his sons,
and the children of Juda, as one man, stood to hasten them that did the
work in the temple of God: the sons of Henadad, and their sons, and
their brethren the Levites.
And when the masons laid the foundations of the temple of the
And they sung together hymns, and praise to the Lord: because he
is good, for his mercy endureth for ever towards Israel. And all the
people shouted with a great shout, praising the Lord, because the
foundations of the temple of the Lord were laid.
But many of the priests and the Levites, and the chief of the
fathers and the ancients that had seen the former temple; when they had
the foundation of this temple before their eyes, wept with a loud voice:
and many shouting for joy, lifted up their voice.
So that one could not distinguish the voice of the shout of joy,
from the noise of the weeping of the people: for one with another the
people shouted with a loud shout, and the voice was heard afar off.
Now the enemies of Juda and Benjamin heard that the children of the
captivity were building a temple to the Lord the God of Israel.
And they came to Zorobabel, and the chief of the fathers, and said
to them: Let us build with you, for we seek your God as ye do: behold we
have sacrificed to him, since the days of Asor Haddan king of Assyria,
who brought us hither.
But Zorobabel, and Josue, and the rest of the chief of the fathers
of Israel said to them: You have nothing to do with us to build a house
to our God, but we ourselves alone will build to the Lord our God, as
Then the people of the land hindered the hands of the people of
And they hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their design
all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius
king of the Persians.
And in the reign of Assuerus, in the beginning of his reign, they
wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Juda and Jerusalem.
is also in the following verse named Artaxerxes, a name common to almost
all the kings of Persia.
And in the days of Artaxerxes, Beselam, Mithridates, and Thabeel,
and the rest that were in the council wrote to Artaxerxes king of the
read in the Syrian tongue.
Reum Beelteem, and Samsai the scribe wrote a letter from Jerusalem
to king Artaxerxes, in this manner:
Reum Beelteem, and Samsai the scribe and the rest of their
counsellors, the Dinites, and the Apharsathacites, the Therphalites, the
And the rest of the nations, whom the great and glorious Asenaphar
brought over: and made to dwell in the cities of Samaria and in the rest
of the countries of this side of the river in peace.
(This is the copy of the letter, which they sent to him:) To
river, send greeting.
Be it known to the king, that the Jews, who came up from thee to
us, are come to Jerusalem a rebellious and wicked city, which they are
building, setting up the ramparts thereof and repairing the walls.
And now be it known to the king, that if this city be built up,
and the walls thereof repaired, they will not pay tribute nor toll, nor
yearly revenues, and this loss will fall upon the kings.
But we remembering the salt that we have eaten in the palace, and
because we count it a crime to see the king wronged, have therefore sent
and certified the king,
That search may be made in the books of the histories of thy
fathers, and thou shalt find written in the records: and shalt know that
this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful to the kings and provinces,
and that wars were raised therein of old time: for which cause also the
city was destroyed.
We certify the king, that if this city be built, and the walls
thereof repaired, thou shalt have no possession on this side of the
river.
The king sent word to Reum Beelteem and Samsai the scribe, and to
the rest that were in their council, inhabitants of Samaria, and to the
rest beyond the river, sending greeting and peace.
The accusation, which you have sent to us, hath been plainly read
before me,
And I commanded: and search hath been made, and it is found, that
this city of old time hath rebelled against kings, and seditions and
wars have been raised therein.
For there have been powerful kings in Jerusalem, who have had
dominion over all the country that is beyond the river: and have
received tribute, and toll and revenues.
Now therefore hear the sentence: Hinder those men, that this city
be not built, till further orders be given by me.
See that you be not negligent in executing this, lest by little
and little the evil grow to the hurt of the kings.
Now the copy of the edict of king Artaxerxes was read before Reum
in haste to Jerusalem to the Jews, and hindered them with arm and power.
Then the work of the house of the Lord in Jerusalem was
interrupted, and ceased till the second year of the reign of Darius king
of the Persians.
building the temple. Which their enemies strive in vain to hinder.
Now Aggeus the prophet, and Zacharias the son of Addo, prophesied
to the Jews that were in Judea and Jerusalem, in the name of the God of
Then rose up Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Josue the son of
them were the prophets of God helping them.
And at the same time came to them Thathanai, who was governor
beyond the river, and Stharbuzanai, and their counsellors: and said thus
to them: Who hath given you counsel to build this house, and to repair
the walls thereof?
In answer to which we gave them the names of the men who were the
promoters of that building.
But the eye of their God was upon the ancients of the Jews, and
they could not hinder them. And it was agreed that the matter should be
referred to Darius, and then they should give satisfaction concerning
that accusation.
The copy of the letter that Thathanai governor of the country
beyond the river, and Stharbuzanai, and his counsellors the
The letter which they sent him, was written thus: To Darius the
king all peace.
Be it known to the king, that we went to the province of Judea, to
the house of the great God, which they are building with unpolished
stones, and timber is laid in the walls: and this work is carried on
diligently and advanceth in their hands.
And we asked those ancients, and said to them thus: Who hath given
you authority to build this house, and to repair these walls?
We asked also of them their names, that we might give thee notice:
and we have written the names of the men that are the chief among them.
And they answered us in these words, saying: We are the servants
of the God of heaven and earth, and we are building a temple that was
built these many years ago, and which a great king of Israel built and
set up.
But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven to
wrath, he delivered them into the hands of Nabuchodonosor the king of
people to Babylon.
But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon, king Cyrus set
forth a decree, that this house of God should be built.
And the vessels also of gold and silver of the temple of God,
which Nabuchodonosor had taken out of the temple, that was in Jerusalem,
and had brought them to the temple of Babylon, king Cyrus brought out of
the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered to one Sassabasar, whom
also he appointed governor,
And said to him: Take these vessels, and go, and put them in the
temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be built in its
place.
Then came this same Sassabasar, and laid the foundations of the
temple of God in Jerusalem, and from that time until now it is in
building, and is not yet finished.
Now therefore if it seem good to the king, let him search in the
king's library, which is in Babylon, whether it hath been decreed by
let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this matter.
Then king Darius gave orders, and they searched in the library of
the books that were laid up in Babylon,
And there was found in Ecbatana, which is a castle in the province
of Media, a book in which this record was written.
In the first year of Cyrus the king: Cyrus the king decreed, that
the house of God should be built, which is in Jerusalem, in the place
where they may offer sacrifices, and that they lay the foundations that
may support the height of threescore cubits, and the breadth of
threescore cubits,
Three rows of unpolished stones, and so rows of new timber: and the
charges shall be given out of the king's house.
And also let the golden and silver vessels of the temple of God,
which Nabuchodonosor took out of the temple of Jerusalem, and brought to
their place, which also were placed in the temple of God.
Now therefore Thathanai, governor of the country beyond the river,
river, depart far from them,
And let that temple of God be built by the governor of the Jews,
and by their ancients, that they may build that house of God in its
place.
I also have commanded what must be done by those ancients of the
chest, that is, of the tribute that is paid out of the country beyond
the river, the charges be diligently given to those men, lest the work
be hindered.
And if it shall be necessary, let calves also, and lambs, and kids,
for holocausts to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil,
according to the custom of the priests that are in Jerusalem, be given
them day by day, that there be no complaint in any thing.
And let them offer oblations to the God of heaven, and pray for
the life of the king, and of his children.
And I have made a decree: That if any whosoever, shall alter this
commandment, a beam be taken from his house, and set up, and he be
nailed upon it, and his house be confiscated.
And may the God, that hath caused his name to dwell there, destroy
all kingdoms, and the people that shall put out their hand to resist,
and to destroy the house of God, that is in Jerusalem. I Darius have
made the decree, which I will have diligently complied with.
So then Thathanai, governor of the country beyond the river, and
king had commanded.
And the ancients of the Jews built, and prospered according to the
prophecy of Aggeus the prophet, and of Zacharias the son of Addo: and
they built and finished, by the commandment of the God of Israel, and by
the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes kings of the
And they were finishing this house of God, until the third day of
the month of Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of king
And the children of Israel, the priests and the Levites, and the
rest of the children of the captivity kept the dedication of the house
of God with joy.
And they offered at the dedication of the house of God, a hundred
calves, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, and for a sin offering for
all Israel twelve he-goats, according to the number of the tribes of
And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in
their courses over the works of God in Jerusalem, as it is written in
the book of Moses.
And the children of Israel of the captivity kept the phase, on the
fourteenth day of the first month.
For all the priests and the Levites were purified as one man: all
were clean to kill the phase for all the children of the captivity, and
for their brethren the priests, and themselves.
And the children of Israel that were returned from captivity, and
all that had separated themselves from the filthiness of the nations of
the earth to them, to seek the Lord the God of Israel, did eat.
And they kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy,
for the Lord had made them joyful, and had turned the heart of the king
of Assyria to them, that he should help their hands in the work of the
house of the Lord the God of Israel.
gracious decree of Artaxerxes.
Now after these things in the reign of Artaxerxes king of the
The son of Sellum, the son of Sadoc, the son of Achitob,
The son of Amarias, the son of Azarias, the son of Maraioth,
The son of Zarahias, the son of Ozi, the son of Bocci,
The son of Abisue, the son of Phinees, the son of Eleazar, the son
of Aaron, the priest from the beginning.
This Esdras went up from Babylon, and he was a ready scribe in the
law of Moses, which the Lord God had given to Israel: and the king
granted him all his request, according to the hand of the Lord his God
upon him.
And there went up some of the children of Israel, and of the
children of the priests, and of the children of the Levites, and of the
singing men, and of the porters, and of the Nathinites to Jerusalem in
the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.
And they came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, in the seventh year
of the king.
For upon the first day of the first month he began to go up from
according to the good hand of his God upon him.
For Esdras had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord, and
to do and to teach in Israel the commandments and judgment.
And this is the copy of the letter of the edict, which king
and commandments of the Lord, and his ceremonies in Israel.
Artaxerxes king of kings to Esdras the priest, the most learned
scribe of the law of the God of heaven, greeting.
It is decreed by me, that all they of the people of Israel, and of
the priests and of the Levites in my realm, that are minded to go into
For thou art sent from before the king, and his seven counsellors,
to visit Judea and Jerusalem according to the law of thy God, which is
in thy hand.
And to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his
counsellors have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose tabernacle
is in Jerusalem.
And all the silver and gold that thou shalt find in all the
province of Babylon, and that the people is willing to offer, and that
the priests shall offer of their own accord to the house of their God,
which is in Jerusalem,
Take freely, and buy diligently with this money, calves, rams,
lambs, with the sacrifices and libations of them, and offer them upon
the altar of the temple of your God, that is in Jerusalem.
And if it seem good to thee, and to thy brethren to do any thing
with the rest of the silver and gold, do it according to the will of
your God.
The vessels also, that are given thee for the sacrifice of the
house of thy God, deliver thou in the sight of God in Jerusalem.
And whatsoever more there shall be need of for the house of thy
given out of the treasury, and the king's exchequer, and by me.
I Artaxerxes the king have ordered and decreed to all the keepers
of the public chest, that are beyond the river, that whatsoever Esdras
the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of
you, you give it without delay,
Unto a hundred talents of silver, and unto a hundred cores of
wheat, and unto a hundred bates of wine, and unto a hundred bates of
oil, and salt without measure.
All that belongeth to the rites of the God of heaven, let it be
given diligently in the house of the God of heaven: lest his wrath
should be enkindled against the realm of the king, and of his sons.
We give you also to understand concerning all the priests, and the
ministers of the house of this God, that you have no authority to impose
toll or tribute, or custom upon them.
And thou Esdras according to the wisdom of thy God, which is in
thy hand, appoint judges and magistrates, that may judge all the people,
that is beyond the river, that is, for them who know the law of thy God,
yea and the ignorant teach ye freely.
And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the
king diligently, judgment shall be executed upon him, either unto death,
or unto banishment, or to the confiscation of goods, or at least to
prison.
Blessed be the Lord the God of our fathers, who hath put this in
the king's heart, to glorify the house of the Lord, which is in
And hath inclined his mercy toward me before the king and his
counsellors, and all the mighty princes of the king: and I being
strengthened by the hand of the Lord my God, which was upon me, gathered
together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.
holy vessels into the temple.
Now these are the chief of families, and the genealogy of them, who
came up with me from Babylon in the reign of Artaxerxes the king.
Of the sons of Phinees, Gersom. Of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel. Of
the sons of David, Hattus.
Of the sons of Sechenias, the son of Pharos, Zacharias, and with
him were numbered a hundred and fifty men.
Of the sons of Phahath Moab, Eleoenai the son of Zareha, and with
him two hundred men.
Of the sons of Sechenias, the son of Ezechiel, and with him three
hundred men.
Of the sons of Adan, Abed the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty
men.
Of the sons of Alam, Isaias the son of Athalias, and with him
seventy men.
Of the sons of Saphatia: Zebodia the son of Michael, and with him
eighty men.
Of the sons of Joab, Obedia the son of Jahiel, and with him two
hundred and eighteen men.
Of the sons of Selomith, the son of Josphia, and with him a
hundred and sixty men.
Of the sons of Bebai, Zacharias the son of Bebai: and with him
eight and twenty men.
Of the sons of Azgad, Joanan the son of Eccetan, and with him a
hundred and ten men.
Of the sons of Adonicam, who were the last: and these are their
names: Eliphelet, and Jehiel, and Samaias, and with them sixty men.
Of the sons of Begui, Uthai and Zachur, and with them seventy men.
And I gathered them together to the river, which runneth down to
among the priests for the sons of Levi, and found none there.
So I sent Eliezer, and Ariel, and Semeias, and Elnathan, and
chief men: and Joiarib, and Elnathan, wise men.
And I sent them to Eddo, who is chief in the place of Chasphia,
and I put in their mouth the words that they should speak to Eddo, and
his brethren the Nathinites in the place of Chasphia, that they should
bring us ministers of the house of our God.
And by the good hand of our God upon us, they brought us a most
learned man of the sons of Moholi the son of Levi the son of Israel, and
And Hasabias, and with him Isaias of the sons of Merari, and his
brethren, and his sons twenty.
And of the Nathinites, whom David, and the princes gave for the
service of the Levites, Nathinites two hundred and twenty: all these
were called by their names.
And I proclaimed there a fast by the river Ahava, that we might
afflict ourselves before the Lord our God, and might ask of him a right
way for us and for our children, and for all our substance.
is, figuratively from sin, but we must also do works of penance; and
therefore Esdras here proclaimed an extraordinary fast to those that
were come from captivity. This shews that fasting was commanded and
practised from the earliest times.
For I was ashamed to ask the king for aid and for horsemen, to
defend us from the enemy in the way: because we had said to the king:
power and strength, and wrath upon all them that forsake him.
And we fasted, and besought our God for this: and it fell out
prosperously unto us.
And I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sarabias, and
And I weighed unto them the silver and gold, and the vessels
consecrated for the house of our God, which the king and his
counsellors, and his princes, and all Israel, that were found had
offered.
And I weighed to their hands six hundred and fifty talents of
silver, and a hundred vessels of silver, and a hundred talents of gold,
And twenty cups of gold, of a thousand solids, and two vessels of
the best shining brass, beautiful as gold.
And I said to them: You are the holy ones of the Lord, and the
vessels are holy, and the silver and gold, that is freely offered to the
Watch ye and keep them, till you deliver them by weight before the
chief of the priests, and of the Levites, and the heads of the families
of Israel in Jerusalem, into the treasure of the house of the Lord.
And the priests and the Levites received the weight of the silver
and gold, and the vessels, to carry them to Jerusalem to the house of
our God.
Then we set forward from the river Ahava on the twelfth day of the
first month to go to Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was upon us, and
delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such as lay in wait by
the way.
And we came to Jerusalem, and we stayed there three days.
And on the fourth day the silver and the gold, and the vessels
were weighed in the house of our God by the hand of Meremoth the son of
them Jozabad the son of Josue, and Noadaia the son of Benoi, Levites.
According to the number and weight of everything: and all the
weight was written at that time.
Moreover the children of them that had been carried away that were
come out of the captivity, offered holocausts to the God of Israel,
twelve calves for all the people of Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-
seven lambs, and twelve he-goats for sin: all for a holocaust to the
And they gave the king's edicts to the lords that were from the
king's court, and the governors beyond the river, and they furthered the
people and the house of God.
prayer.
And after these things were accomplished, the princes came to me,
saying: The people of Israel, and the priests and Levites have not
separated themselves from the people of the lands, and from their
abominations, namely, of the Chanaanites, and the Hethites, and the
the Egyptians, and the Amorrhites.
forbids us, on account of the danger of perversion and falling off from
the true faith.
For they have taken of their daughters for themselves and for their
sons, and they have mingled the holy seed with the people of the lands.
transgression.
And when I had heard this word, I rent my mantle and my coat, and
plucked off the hairs of my head and my beard, and I sat down mourning.
And there were assembled to me all that feared the God of Israel,
because of the transgression of those that were come from the captivity,
and I sat sorrowful, until the evening sacrifice.
And at the evening sacrifice I rose up from my affliction, and
having rent my mantle and my garment, I fell upon my knees, and spread
out my hands to the Lord my God,
And said: My God I am confounded and ashamed to lift up my face to
thee: for our iniquities are multiplied over our heads, and our sins are
grown up even unto heaven,
From the days of our fathers: and we ourselves also have sinned
grievously unto this day, and for our iniquities we and our kings, and
our priests have been delivered into the hands of the kings of the
lands, and to the sword, and to captivity, and to spoil, and to
confusion of face, as it is at this day.
And now as a little, and for a moment has our prayer been made
before the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant, and give us a pin in his
holy place, and that our God would enlighten our eyes, and would give us
a little life in our bondage.
great iniquity had incurred the anger of God.
For we are bondmen, and in our bondage our God hath not forsaken
us, but hath extended mercy upon us before the king of the Persians, to
give us life, and to set up the house of our God, and to rebuild the
desolations thereof, and to give us a fence in Juda and Jerusalem.
And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thy commandments,
Which thou hast commanded by the hand of thy servants the
prophets, saying: The land which you go to possess, is an unclean land,
according to the uncleanness of the people, and of other lands, with
their abominations, who have filled it from mouth to mouth with their
filth.
Now therefore give not your daughters to their sons, and take not
their daughters for your sons, and seek not their peace, nor their
prosperity for ever: that you may be strengthened, and may eat the good
things of the land, and may have your children your heirs for ever.
And after all that is come upon us, for our most wicked deeds, and
our great sin, seeing that thou our God hast saved us from our iniquity,
and hast given us a deliverance as at this day,
That we should not turn away, nor break thy commandments, nor join
in marriage with the people of these abominations. Art thou angry with
us unto utter destruction, not to leave us a remnant to be saved?
O Lord God of Israel, thou art just: for we remain yet to be saved
as at this day. Behold we are before thee in our sin, for there can be
no standing before thee in this matter.
Now when Esdras was thus praying, and beseeching, and weeping, and
lying before the temple of God, there was gathered to him of Israel an
exceeding great assembly of men and women and children, and the people
wept with much lamentation.
And Sechenias the son of Jehiel of the sons of Elam answered, and
said to Esdras: We have sinned against our God, and have taken strange
wives of the people of the land: and now if there be repentance in
Let us make a covenant with the Lord our God, to put away all the
wives, and such as are born of them, according to the will of the Lord,
and of them that fear the commandment of the Lord our God: let it be
done according to the law.
Arise, it is thy part to give orders, and we will be with thee:
take courage, and do it.
So Esdras arose, and made the chiefs of the priests and of the
word, and they swore.
And Esdras rose up from before the house of God, and went to the
chamber of Johanan the son of Eliasib, and entered in thither: he ate no
bread, and drank no water: for he mourned for the transgression of them
that were come out of the captivity.
And proclamation was made in Juda and Jerusalem to all the
children of the captivity, that they should assemble together into
And that whosoever would not come within three days, according to
the counsel of the princes and the ancients, all his substance should be
taken away, and he should be cast out of the company of them that were
returned from captivity.
Then all the men of Juda, and Benjamin gathered themselves
together to Jerusalem within three days, in the ninth month, the
twentieth day of the month: and all the people sat in the street of the
house of God, trembling because of the sin, and the rain.
And Esdras the priest stood up, and said to them: You have
transgressed, and taken strange wives, to add to the sins of Israel.
And now make confession to the Lord the God of your fathers, and
do his pleasure, and separate yourselves from the people of the land,
and from your strange wives.
And all the multitude answered and said with a loud voice:
But as the people are many, and it is time of rain, and we are
not able to stand without, and it is not a work of one day or two, (for
we have exceedingly sinned in this matter,)
Let rulers be appointed in all the multitude: and in all our
cities, let them that have taken strange wives come at the times
appointed, and with them the ancients and the judges of every city,
until the wrath of our God be turned away from us for this sin.
Then Jonathan the son of Azahel, and Jaasia the son of Thecua
were appointed over this, and Mesollam and Sebethai, Levites, helped
them:
And the children of the captivity did so. And Esdras the priest,
and the men heads of the families in the houses of their fathers, and
all by their names, went and sat down in the first day of the tenth
month to examine the matter.
And they made an end with all the men that had taken strange
wives by the first day of the first month.
And there were found among the sons of the priests that had taken
strange wives: Of the sons of Josue the son of Josedec, and his
brethren, Maasia, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Godolia.
And they gave their hands to put away their wives, and to offer
for their offence a ram of the flock.
And of the sons of Emmer, Hanani, and Zebedia.
And of the sons of Harim, Maasia, and Elia, and Semeia, and
And of the sons of Pheshur, Elioenai, Maasia, Ismael, Nathanael,
And of the sons of the Levites, Jozabed, and Semei, and Celaia,
the same is Calita, Phataia, Juda, and Eliezer.
And of the singing men, Elisiab: and of the porters, Sellum, and
And of Israel, of the sons of Pharos, Remeia, and Jezia, and
And of the sons of Elam, Mathania, Zacharias, and Jehiel, and
And of the sons of Zethua, Elioenai, Eliasib, Mathania, Jerimuth,
and Zabad, and Aziaza.
And of the sons of Babai, Johanan, Hanania, Zabbai, Athalai:
And of the sons of Bani, Mosollam, and Melluch, and Adaia, Jasub,
and Saal, and Ramoth.
And of the sons of Phahath, Moab, Edna, and Chalal, Banaias, and
And of the sons of Herem, Eliezer, Josue, Melchias, Semeias,
Benjamin, Maloch, Samarias.
And of the sons of Hasom, Mathanai, Mathatha, Zabad, Eliphelet,
Of the sons of Bani, Maaddi, Amram, and Uel,
Baneas, and Badaias, Cheliau,
Vania, Marimuth, and Eliasib,
Mathanias, Mathania, and Jasi,
And Bani, and Bennui, Semei,
And Salmias, and Nathan, and Adaias,
And Mechnedebai, Sisai, Sarai,
Ezrel, and Selemiau, Semeria,
Sellum, Amaria, Joseph.
Of the sons of Nebo, Jehiel, Mathathias, Zabad, Zabina, Jeddu,
and Joel, and Banaia.
All these had taken strange wives, and there were among them
women that had borne children.
with a commission to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. It is also called
the second book of Esdras; because it is a continuation of the history,
begun by Esdras, of the state of the people of God after their return
from captivity.
lamenteth, fasteth, and prayeth to God for their relief.
The words of Nehemias the son of Helchias. And it came to pass in
the month of Casleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in the castle of
That Hanani one of my brethren came, he and some men of Juda; and I
asked them concerning the Jews, that remained and were left of the
captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.
And they said to me: They that have remained, and are left of the
captivity there in the province, are in great affliction, and reproach:
and the wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and the gates thereof are
burnt with fire.
And when I had heard these words, I sat down, and wept, and mourned
for many days: and I fasted, and prayed before the face of the God of
heaven.
And I said: I beseech thee, O Lord God of heaven, strong, great,
and terrible, who keepest covenant and mercy with those that love thee,
and keep thy commandments:
Let thy ears be attentive, and thy eyes open, to hear the prayer of
thy servant, which I pray before thee now, night and day, for the
children of Israel thy servants: and I confess the sins of the children
of Israel, by which they have sinned against thee: I and my father's
house have sinned.
We have been seduced by vanity, and have not kept thy commandments,
and ceremonies and judgments, which thou hast commanded thy servant
Remember the word that thou commandedst to Moses thy servant,
saying: If you shall transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the
nations:
But if you return to me, and keep my commandments, and do them,
though you should be led away to the uttermost parts of the world, I
will gather you from thence, and bring you back to the place which I
have chosen for my name to dwell there.
And these are thy servants, and thy people: whom thou hast
redeemed by thy great strength, and by thy mighty hand.
I beseech thee, O Lord, let thy ear be attentive to the prayer of
thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants who desire to fear thy
name: and direct thy servant this day, and give him mercy before this
man. For I was the king's cupbearer.
exhorteth the Jews to rebuild the walls.
And it came to pass in the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of
and gave it to the king: and I was as one languishing away before his
face.
And the king said to me: Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou
dost not appear to be sick? this is not without cause, but some evil, I
know not what, is in thy heart. And I was seized with an exceeding great
fear:
And I said to the king: O king, live for ever: why should not my
countenance be sorrowful, seeing the city of the place of the sepulchres
of my fathers is desolate, and the gates thereof are burnt with fire?
Then the king said to me: For what dost thou make request?  And I
prayed to the God of heaven,
And I said to the king: If it seem good to the king, and if thy
servant hath found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldst send me into
And the king said to me, and the queen that sat by him: For how
long shall thy journey be, and when wilt thou return? And it pleased the
king, and he sent me: and I fixed him a time.
And I said to the king: If it seem good to the king, let him give
me letters to the governors of the country beyond the river, that they
convey me over, till I come into Judea:
And a letter to Asaph the keeper of the king's forest, to give me
timber that I may cover the gates of the tower of the house, and the
walls of the city, and the house that I shall enter into. And the king
gave me according to the good hand of my God with me.
And I came to the governors of the country beyond the river, and
gave them the king's letters. And the king had sent with me captains of
soldiers, and horsemen.
And Sanaballat the Horonite, and Tobias the servant, the Ammonite,
heard it, and it grieved them exceedingly, that a man was come, who
sought the prosperity of the children of Israel.
And I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.
And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me, and I told
not any man what God had put in my heart to do in Jerusalem, and there
was no beast with me, but the beast that I rode upon.
And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, and before the
dragon fountain, and to the dung gate, and I viewed the wall of
consumed with fire.
And I passed to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's
aqueduct, and there was no place for the beast on which I rode to pass.
And I went up in the night by the torrent, and viewed the wall,
and going back I came to the gate of the valley, and returned.
But the magistrates knew not whither I went, or what I did:
neither had I as yet told any thing to the Jews, or to the priests, or
to the nobles, or to the magistrates, or to the rest that did the work.
Then I said to them: You know the affliction wherein we are,
because Jerusalem is desolate, and the gates thereof are consumed with
fire: come, and let us build up the walls of Jerusalem, and let us be no
longer a reproach.
And I shewed them how the hand of my God was good with me, and the
king's words, which he had spoken to me, and I said: Let us rise up, and
build. And their hands were strengthened in good.
But Sanaballat the Horonite, and Tobias the servant, the Ammonite,
and Gossem the Arabian heard of it, and they scoffed at us, and despised
us, and said: What is this thing that you do? are you going to rebel
against the king?
And I answered them, and said to them: The God of heaven he
helpeth us, and we are his servants: let us rise up and build: but you
have no part, nor justice, nor remembrance in Jerusalem.
Then Eliasib the high priest arose, and his brethren the priests,
and they built the flock gate: they sanctified it, and set up the doors
thereof, even unto the tower of a hundred cubits they sanctified it unto
the tower of Hananeel.
And next to him the men of Jericho built: and next to them built
But the fish gate the sons of Asnaa built: they covered it, and set
up the doors thereof, and the locks, and the bars.  And next to them
built Marimuth the son of Urias the son of Accus.
And next to him built Mosollam the son of Barachias, the son of
And next to them the Thecuites built: but their great men did not put
their necks to the work of their Lord.
And Joiada the son of Phasea, and Mosollam the son of Besodia built
the old gate: they covered it and set up the doors thereof, and the
locks, and the bars.
And next to them built Meltias the Gabaonite, and Jadon the
the country beyond the river.
And next to him built Eziel the son of Araia the goldsmith: and
next to him built Ananias the son of the perfumer: and they left
And next to him built Raphaia the son of Hur, lord of the street of
And next to him Jedaia the son of Haromaph over against his own
house: and next to him built Hattus the son of Hasebonia.
Melchias the son of Herem, and Hasub the son of Phahath Moab,
built half the street, and the tower of the furnaces.
And next to him built Sellum the son of Alohes, lord of half the
street of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.
And the gate of the valley Hanun built, and the inhabitants of
the bars, and a thousand cubits in the wall unto the gate of the
dunghill.
And the gate of the dunghill Melchias the son of Rechab built,
lord of the street of Bethacharam: he built it, and set up the doors
thereof, and the locks, and the bars.
And the gate of the fountain, Sellum, the son of Cholhoza, built,
lord of the street of Maspha: he built it, and covered it, and set up
the doors thereof, and the locks, and the bars, and the walls of the
pool of Siloe unto the king's guard, and unto the steps that go down
from the city of David.
After him built Nehemias the son of Azboc, lord of half the street
of Bethsur, as far as over against the sepulchre of David, and to the
pool, that was built with great labour, and to the house of the mighty.
After him built the Levites, Rehum the son of Benni. After him
built Hasebias, lord of half the street of Ceila in his own street.
After him built their brethren Bavai the son of Enadad, lord of
half Ceila.
And next to him Aser the son of Josue, lord of Maspha, built
another measure, over against the going up of the strong corner.
After him in the mount Baruch the son of Zachai built another
measure, from the corner to the door of the house of Eliasib the high
priest.
After him Merimuth the son of Urias the son of Haccus, built
another measure, from the door of the house of Eliasib, to the end of
the house of Eliasib.
And after him built the priests, the men of the plains of the
After him built Benjamin and Hasub, over against their own house:
and after him built Azarias the son of Maasias the son of Ananias over
against his house.
After him built Bennui the son of Hanadad another measure, from
the house of Azarias unto the bending, and unto the corner.
Phalel, the son of Ozi, over against the bending and the tower,
which lieth out from the king's high house, that is, in the court of the
prison: after him Phadaia the son of Pharos.
And the Nathinites dwelt in Ophel, as far as over against the
water gate toward the east, and the tower that stood out.
After him the Thecuites built another measure over against, from
the great tower that standeth out unto the wall of the temple.
And upward from the horse gate the priests built, every man over
against his house.
After them built Sadoc the son of Emmer over against his house.
gate.
After him built Hanania the son of Selemia, and Hanun the sixth
son of Seleph, another measure: after him built Mosollam the son of
son built unto the house of the Nathinites, and of the sellers of small
wares, over against the judgment gate, and unto the chamber of the
corner.
And within the chamber of the corner of the flock gate, the
goldsmiths and the merchants built.
enemies.
And it came to pass, that when Sanaballat heard that we were
building the wall he was angry: and being moved exceedingly he scoffed
at the Jews.
And said before his brethren, and the multitude of the Samaritans:
they sacrifice and make an end in a day? are they able to raise stones
out of the heaps of the rubbish, which are burnt?
Tobias also the Ammonite who was by him said: Let them build: if a
fox go up, he will leap over their stone wall.
Hear thou our God, for we are despised: turn their reproach upon
their own head, and give them to be despised in a land of captivity.
Cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from
before thy face, because they have mocked thy builders.
So we built the wall, and joined it all together unto the half
thereof: and the heart of the people was excited to work.
And it came to pass, when Sanaballat, and Tobias, and the Arabians,
and the Ammonites, and the Azotians heard that the walls of Jerusalem
were made up, and the breaches began to be closed, that they were
exceedingly angry.
And they all assembled themselves together, to come, and to fight
against Jerusalem, and to prepare ambushes.
And we prayed to our God, and set watchmen upon the wall day and
night against them.
And Juda said: The strength of the bearer of burdens is decayed,
and the rubbish is very much, and we shall not be able to build the
wall.
And our enemies said: Let them not know, nor understand, till we
come in the midst of them, and kill them, and cause the work to cease.
And it came to pass, that when the Jews that dwelt by them came
and told us ten times, out of all the places from whence they came to
us,
I set the people in the place behind the wall round about in
order, with their swords, and spears, and bows.
And I looked and rose up: and I said to the chief men and the
magistrates, and to the rest of the common people: be not afraid of
them. Remember the Lord who is great and terrible, and fight for your
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, and your wives, and your
houses.
And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that the thing had
been told us, that God defeated their counsel. And we returned all of us
to the walls, every man to his work.
And it came to pass from that day forward, that half of their
young men did the work, and half were ready for to fight, with spears,
and shields, and bows, and coats of mail, and the rulers were behind
them in all the house of Juda.
Of them that built on the wall and that carried burdens, and that
laded: with one of his hands he did the work, and with the other he held
a sword.
For every one of the builders was girded with a sword about his
reins. And they built, and sounded with a trumpet by me.
And I said to the nobles, and to the magistrates, and to the rest
of the common people: The work is great and wide, and we are separated
on the wall one far from another:
In what place soever you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, run
all thither unto us: our God will fight for us.
And let us do the work: and let one half of us hold our spears
from the rising of the morning, till the stars appear.
At that time also I said to the people: Let every one with his
servant stay in the midst of Jerusalem, and let us take our turns in the
night, and by day, to work.
Now I and my brethren, and my servants, and the watchmen that
followed me, did not put off our clothes: only every man stripped
himself when he was to be washed.
exhortation, and bounty to his countrymen.
Now there was a great cry of the people, and of their wives against
their brethren the Jews.
And there were some that said: Our sons and our daughters are very
many: let us take up corn for the price of them, and let us eat and
live.
And there were some that said: Let us mortgage our lands, and our
vineyards, and our houses, and let us take corn because of the famine.
And others said: Let us borrow money for the king's tribute, and
let us give up our fields and vineyards:
And now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren: and our children
as their children. Behold we bring into bondage our sons and our
daughters, and some of our daughters are bondwomen already, neither have
we wherewith to redeem them, and our fields and our vineyards other men
possess.
And I was exceedingly angry when I heard their cry according to
these words.
And my heart thought with myself: and I rebuked the nobles and
magistrates, and said to them: Do you every one exact usury of your
brethren? And I gathered together a great assembly against them,
And I said to them: We, as you know, have redeemed according to our
ability our brethren the Jews, that were sold to the Gentiles: and will
you then sell your brethren, for us to redeem them? And they held their
peace, and found not what to answer.
And I said to them: The thing you do is not good: why walk you not
in the fear of our God, that we be not exposed to the reproaches of the
Both I and my brethren, and my servants, have lent money and corn
to many: let us all agree not to call for it again; let us forgive the
debt that is owing to us.
Restore ye to them this day their fields, and their vineyards, and
their oliveyards, and their houses: and the hundredth part of the money,
and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, which you were wont to exact of
them, give it rather for them.
And they said: We will restore, and we will require nothing of
them: and we will do as thou sayest. And I called the priests and took
an oath of them, to do according to what I had said.
Moreover I shook my lap, and said: So may God shake every man that
shall not accomplish this word, out of his house, and out of his
labours, thus may he be shaken out, and become empty.  And all the
multitude said: Amen. And they praised God. And the people did according
to what was said.
And from the day, in which the king commanded me to be governor in
the land of Juda, from the twentieth year even to the two and thirtieth
year of Artaxerxes the king, for twelve years, I and my brethren did not
eat the yearly allowance that was due to the governors.
But the former governors that had been before me, were chargeable
to the people, and took of them in bread, and wine, and in money every
day forty sicles: and their officers also oppressed the people. But I
did not so for the fear of God.
Moreover I built in the work of the wall, and I bought no land,
and all my servants were gathered together to the work.
The Jews also and the magistrates to the number of one hundred and
fifty men, were at my table, besides them that came to us from among the
nations that were round about us.
And there was prepared for me day be day one ox, and six choice
rams, besides fowls, and once in ten days I gave store of divers wines,
and many other things: yet I did not require my yearly allowance as
governor: for the people were very much impoverished.
Remember me, O my God, for good according to all that I have done
for this people.
wall.
And it came to pass, when Sanaballat, and Tobias, and Gossem the
and that there was no breach left in it, (though at that time I had not
set up the doors in the gates,)
Sanaballat and Gossem sent to me, saying: Come, and let us make a
league together in the villages, in the plain of Ono.  But they thought
to do me mischief.
And I sent messengers to them, saying: I am doing a great work, and
you.
And they sent to me according to this word, four times: and I
answered them after the same manner.
And Sanaballat sent his servant to me the fifth time according to
the former word, and he had a letter in his hand written in this manner:
It is reported amongst the Gentiles, and Gossem hath said it, that
thou and the Jews think to rebel, and therefore thou buildest the wall,
and hast a mind to set thyself king over them: for which end
Thou hast also set up prophets, to preach of thee at Jerusalem,
saying: There is a king in Judea. The king will hear of these things:
therefore come now, that we may take counsel together.
And I sent to them, saying: There is no such thing done as thou
sayest: but thou feignest these things out of thy own heart.
For all these men thought to frighten us, thinking that our hands
would cease from the work, and that we would leave off.  Wherefore I
strengthened my hands the more:
And I went into the house of Samaia the son of Delaia, the son of
for they will come to kill thee, and in the night they will come to slay
thee.
And I said: Should such a man as I flee? and who is there that
being as I am, would go into the temple, to save his life?  I will not
go in.
And I understood that God had not sent him, but that he had spoken
to me as if he had been prophesying, and Tobias, and Sanaballat had
hired him.
For he had taken money, that I being afraid should do this thing,
and sin, and they might have some evil to upbraid me withal.
Remember me, O Lord, for Tobias and Sanaballat, according to their
works of this kind: and Noadias the prophet, and the rest of the
prophets that would have put me in fear.
But the wall was finished the five and twentieth day of the month
of Elul, in two and fifty days.
And it came to pass when all our enemies heard of it, that all
nations which were round about us, were afraid, and were cast down
within themselves, for they perceived that this work was the work of
Moreover in those days many letters were sent by the principal men
of the Jews to Tobias, and from Tobias there came letters to them.
For there were many in Judea sworn to him, because he was the son-
in-law of Sechenias the son of Area, and Johanan his son had taken to
wife the daughter of Mosollam the son of Barachias.
And they praised him also before me, and they related my words to
him: And Tobias sent letters to put me in fear.
first from Babylon.
Now after the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and
numbered the porters and singing men, and Levites:
I commanded Hanani my brother, and Hananias ruler of the house of
above the rest,)
And I said to them: Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened till
the sun be hot. And while they were yet standing by the gates were shut,
and barred: and I set watchmen of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every
one by their courses, and every man over against his house.
And the city was very wide and great, and the people few in the
midst thereof, and the houses were not built.
But God had put in my heart, and I assembled the princes and
magistrates, and common people, to number them: and I found a book of
the number of them who came up at first and therein it was found
written:
These are the children of the province, who came up from the
captivity of them that had been carried away, whom Nabuchodonosor the
king of Babylon had carried away, and who returned into Judea, every one
into his own city.
Who came with Zorobabel, Josue, Nehemias, Azarias, Raamias,
number of the men of the people of Israel:
The children of Pharos, two thousand one hundred seventy-two.
The children of Sephatia, three hundred seventy-two.
The children of Area, six hundred fifty-two.
The children of Phahath Moab of the children of Josue and Joab,
two thousand eight hundred eighteen.
The children of Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four.
The children of Zethua, eight hundred forty-five.
The children of Zachai, seven hundred sixty.
The children of Bannui, six hundred forty-eight.
The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty-eight.
The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty-two.
The children of Adonicam, six hundred sixty-seven.
The children of Beguai, two thousand sixty-seven.
The children of Adin, six hundred fifty-five.
The children of Ater, children of Hezechias, ninety-eight.
The children of Hasem, three hundred twenty-eight.
The children of Besai, three hundred twenty-four.
The children of Hareph, a hundred and twelve.
The children of Gabaon, ninety-five.
The children of Bethlehem, and Netupha, a hundred eighty-eight.
The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty-eight.
The men of Bethazmoth, forty-two.
The men of Cariathiarim, Cephira, and Beroth, seven hundred forty-
three.
The men of Rama and Geba, six hundred twenty-one.
The men of Machmas, a hundred twenty-two.
The men of Bethel and Hai, a hundred twenty-three.
The men of the other Nebo, fifty-two.
The men of the other Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four.
The children of Harem, three hundred and twenty.
The children of Jericho, three hundred forty-five.
The children of Lod, of Hadid and Ono, seven hundred twenty-one.
The children of Senaa,  three thousand nine hundred thirty.
The priests: the children of Idaia in the house of Josue, nine
hundred and seventy-three.
The children of Emmer, one thousand fifty-two.
The children of Phashur, one thousand two hundred forty-seven.
The children of Arem, one thousand and seventeen. The Levites:
The children of Josue and Cedmihel, the sons
Of Oduia, seventy-four. The singing men:
The children of Asaph, a hundred forty-eight.
The porters: the children of Sellum, the children of Ater, the
children of Telmon, the children of Accub, the children of Hatita, the
children of Sobai: a hundred thirty-eight.
The Nathinites: the children of Soha, the children of Hasupha, the
children of Tebbaoth,
The children of Ceros, the children os Siaa, the children of
The children of Hanan, the children of Geddel, the children of
The children of Raaia, the children of Rasin, the children of
The children of Gezem, the children of Asa, the children of
The children of Besai, the children of Munim, the children of
The children of Bacbuc, the children of Hacupha, the children of
The children of Besloth, the children of Mahida, the children of
The children of Bercos, the children of Sisara, the children of
The children of Nasia, the children of Hatipha,
The children of the servants of Solomon, the children of Sothai,
the children of Sophereth, the children of Pharida,
The children of Jahala, the children of Darcon, the children of
The children of Saphatia, the children of Hatil, the children of
All the Nathinites, and the children of the servants of Solomon,
three hundred ninety-two.
And these are they that came up from Telmela, Thelharsa, Cherub,
their seed, whether they were of Israel.
The children of Dalaia, the children of Tobia, the children of
And of the priests, the children of Habia, the children of Accos,
the children of Berzellai, who took a wife of the daughters of Berzellai
the Galaadite, and he was called by their name.
These sought their writing in the record, and found it not: and
they were cast out of the priesthood.
And Athersatha said to them, that they should not eat of the
holies of holies, until there stood up a priest learned and skilful.
All the multitude as it were one man, forty-two thousand three
hundred sixty,
Beside their men-servants and women-servants, who were seven
thousand three hundred thirty-seven: and among them singing men, and
singing women, two hundred forty-five.
Their horses, seven hundred thirty-six: their mules two hundred
forty-five.
Their camels, four hundred thirty-five, their asses, six thousand
seven hundred and twenty.
(Hitherto is related what was written in the record. From this place
forward goeth on the history of Nehemias.)
And some of the heads of the families gave unto the work.
and five hundred and thirty garments for priests.
he was so called at the court of the king of Persia, where he was
cupbearer: or that, as some think, this name signifies governor; and he
was at that time governor of Judea.
And some of the heads of families gave to the treasure of the
work, twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand two hundred pounds
of silver.
And that which the rest of the people gave, was twenty thousand
drams of gold, and two thousand pounds of silver, and sixty-seven
garments for priests.
And the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singing
men, and the rest of the common people, and the Nathinites, and all
celebrate the feast of tabernacles.
And the seventh month came: and the children of Israel were in
their cities. And all the people were gathered together as one man to
the street which is before the water gate, and they spoke to Esdras the
scribe, to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had
commanded to Israel.
Then Esdras the priest brought the law before the multitude of men
and women, and all those that could understand, in the first day of the
seventh month.
And he read it plainly in the street that was before the water
gate, from the morning until midday, before the men, and the women, and
all those that could understand: and the ears of all the people were
attentive to the book.
And Esdras the scribe stood upon a step of wood, which he had made
to speak upon, and there stood by him Mathathias, and Semeia, and Ania,
and Uria, and Helcia, and Maasia, on his right hand: and on the left,
And Esdras opened the book before all the people: for he was above
all the people: and when he had opened it, all the people stood.
And Esdras blessed the Lord the great God: and all the people
answered, Amen, amen: lifting up their hands: and they bowed down, and
adored God with their faces to the ground.
Now Josue, and Bani, and Serebia, Jamin, Accub, Sephtai, Odia,
silence among the people to hear the law: and the people stood in their
place.
And they read in the book of the law of God distinctly and plainly
to be understood: and they understood when it was read.
And Nehemias (he is Athersatha) and Esdras the priest and scribe,
and the Levites who interpreted to all the people, said: This is a holy
day to the Lord our God: do not mourn, nor weep: for all the people
wept, when they heard the words of the law.
And he said to them: Go, eat fat meats, and drink sweet wine, and
send portions to them that have not prepared for themselves: because it
is the holy day of the Lord, and be not sad: for the joy of the Lord is
our strength.
And the Levites stilled all the people, saying: Hold your peace,
for the day is holy, and be not sorrowful.
So all the people went to eat and drink, and to send portions, and
to make great mirth: because they understood the words that he had
taught them.
And on the second day the chiefs of the families of all the
people, the priests, and the Levites were gathered together to Esdras
the scribe, that he should interpret to them the words of the law.
And they found written in the law, that the Lord had commanded by
the hand of Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in
tabernacles, on the feast, in the seventh month:
And that they should proclaim and publish the word in all their
cities, and in Jerusalem, saying: Go forth to the mount, and fetch
branches of olive, and branches of beautiful wood, branches of myrtle,
and branches of palm, and branches of thick trees, to make tabernacles,
as it is written.
And the people went forth, and brought. And they made themselves
tabernacles every man on the top of his house, and in their courts, and
in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water gate,
and in the street of the gate of Ephraim.
And all the assembly of them that were returned from the
captivity, made tabernacles, and dwelt in tabernacles: for since the
days of Josue the son of Nun the children of Israel had not done so,
until that day: and there was exceeding great joy.
And he read in the book of the law of God day by day, from the
first day till the last, and they kept the solemnity seven days, and in
the eighth day a solemn assembly according to the manner.
benefits, and the people's ingratitude: they pray for them, and make a
covenant with God.
And in the four and twentieth day of the month the children of
them.
And the seed of the children of Israel separated themselves from
every stranger: and they stood, and confessed their sins, and the
iniquities of their fathers.
And they rose up to stand: and they read in the book of the law of
the Lord their God, four times in the day, and four times they
confessed, and adored the Lord their God.
And there stood up upon the step of the Levites, Josue, and Bani,
and Cedmihel, Sabania, Bonni, Sarebias, Bani, and Chanani: and they
cried with a loud voice to the Lord their God.
And the Levites Josue and Cedmihel, Bonni, Hasebnia, Serebia,
eternity to eternity: and blessed be the high name of thy glory with all
blessing and praise.
Thou thyself, O Lord alone, thou hast made heaven, and the heaven
of heavens, and all the host thereof: the earth and all things that are
in it: the seas and all that are therein: and thou givest life to all
these things, and the host of heaven adoreth thee.
Thou O Lord God, art he who chosest Abram, and broughtest him forth
out of the fire of the Chaldeans, and gavest him the name of Abraham.
which signifies fire. Or out of the fire of the tribulations and
temptations, to which he was there exposed.-The ancient Rabbins
understood this literally, affirming that Abram was cast into the fire
by the idolaters, and brought out by a miracle without any hurt.
And thou didst find his heart faithful before thee: and thou madest
a covenant with him, to give him the land of the Chanaanite, of the
fulfilled thy words, because thou art just.
And thou sawest the affliction of our fathers in Egypt: and thou
didst hear their cry by the Red Sea.
And thou shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharao, and upon all his
servants, and upon the people of his land: for thou knewest that they
dealt proudly against them: and thou madest thyself a name, as it is at
this day.
And thou didst divide the sea before them, and they passed through
the midst of the sea on dry land: but their persecutors thou threwest
into the depth, as a stone into mighty waters.
And in a pillar of a cloud thou wast their leader by day, and in a
pillar of fire by night, that they might see the way by which they went.
Thou camest down also to mount Sinai, and didst speak with them
from heaven, and thou gavest them right judgments, and the law of truth,
ceremonies, and good precepts.
Thou madest known to them thy holy sabbath, and didst prescribe to
them commandments, and ceremonies, and the law by the hand of Moses thy
servant.
And thou gavest them bread from heaven in their hunger, and
broughtest forth water for them out of the rock in their thirst, and
thou saidst to them that they should go in, and possess the land, upon
which thou hadst lifted up thy hand to give it them.
But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks
and hearkened not to thy commandments.
And they would not hear, and they remembered not thy wonders which
thou hadst done for them. And they hardened their necks, and gave the
head to return to their bondage, as it were by contention. But thou, a
forgiving God, gracious, and merciful, longsuffering, and full of
compassion, didst not forsake them.
return to Egypt.
Yea when they had made also to themselves a molten calf, and had
said: This is thy God, that brought thee out of Egypt: and had committed
great blasphemies:
Yet thou, in thy many mercies, didst not leave them in the desert:
the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day to lead them in
the way, and the pillar of fire by night to shew them the way by which
they should go.
And thou gavest them thy good Spirit to teach them, and thy manna
thou didst not withhold from their mouth, and thou gavest them water for
their thirst.
Forty years didst thou feed them in the desert, and nothing was
wanting to them: their garments did not grow old, and their feet were
not worn.
And thou gavest them kingdoms, and nations, and didst divide lots
for them: and they possessed the land of Sehon, and the land of the king
of Hesebon, and the land of Og king of Basan.
And thou didst multiply their children as the stars of heaven, and
broughtest them to the land concerning which thou hadst said to their
fathers, that they should go in and possess it.
And the children came and possessed the land, and thou didst
humble before them the inhabitants of the land, the Chanaanites, and
gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the
land, that they might do with them as it pleased them.
And they took strong cities and a fat land, and possessed houses
full of all goods: cisterns made by others, vineyards, and oliveyards,
and fruit trees in abundance: and they ate, and were filled, and became
fat, and abounded with delight in thy great goodness.
But they provoked thee to wrath, and departed from thee, and threw
thy law behind their backs: and they killed thy prophets, who admonished
them earnestly to return to thee: and they were guilty of great
blasphemies.
And thou gavest them into the hands of their enemies, and they
afflicted them. And in the time of their tribulation they cried to thee,
and thou heardest from heaven, and according to the multitude of thy
tender mercies thou gavest them saviours, to save them from the hands of
their enemies.
But after they had rest, they returned to do evil in thy sight:
and thou leftest them in the hand of their enemies, and they had
dominion over them. Then they returned, and cried to thee: and thou
heardest from heaven, and deliveredst them many times in thy mercies.
And thou didst admonish them to return to thy law. But they dealt
proudly, and hearkened not to thy commandments, but sinned against thy
judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them: and they withdrew
the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.
And thou didst forbear with them for many years, and didst testify
against them by thy spirit by the hand of thy prophets: and they heard
not, and thou didst deliver them into the hand of the people of the
lands.
Yet in thy very many mercies thou didst not utterly consume them,
nor forsake them: because thou art a merciful and gracious God.
Now therefore our God, great, strong, and terrible, who keepest
covenant and mercy, turn not away from thy face all the labour which
hath come upon us, upon our kings, and our princes, and our priests, and
our prophets, and our fathers, and all the people from the days of the
king of Assur, until this day.
And thou art just in all things that have come upon us: because
thou hast done truth, but we have done wickedly.
Our kings, our princes, our priests, and our fathers have not kept
thy law, and have not minded thy commandments, and thy testimonies which
thou hast testified among them.
And they have not served thee in their kingdoms, and in thy
manifold goodness, which thou gavest them, and in the large and fat
land, which thou deliveredst before them, nor did they return from their
most wicked devices.
Behold we ourselves this day are bondmen: and the land, which thou
gavest our fathers, to eat the bread thereof, and the good things
thereof, and we ourselves are servants in it.
And the fruits thereof grow up for the kings, whom thou hast set
over us for our sins, and they have dominion over our bodies, and over
our beasts, according to their will, and we are in great tribulation.
And because of all this we ourselves make a covenant, and write
it, and our princes, our Levites, and our priests sign it.
And the subscribers were Nehemias, Athersatha the son of Hachelai,
and Sedecias,
Saraias, Azarias, Jeremias,
Pheshur, Amarias, Melchias,
Hattus, Sebenia, Melluch,
Harem, Merimuth, Obdias,
Daniel, Genthon, Baruch,
Mosollam, Abia, Miamin,
Maazia, Belgia, Semeia: these were priests.
And the Levites, Josue the son of Azanias, Bennui of the sons of
And their brethren, Sebenia, Oduia, Celita, Phalaia, Hanan,
Micha, Rohob, Hasebia,
Zachur, Serebia, Sabania,
Odaia, Bani, Baninu.
The heads of the people, Pharos, Phahath Moab, Elam, Zethu, Bani,
Bonni, Azgad, Bebai,
Adonia, Begoai, Adin,
Ater, Hezecia, Azur,
Odaia, Hasum, Besai,
Hareph, Anathoth, Nebai,
Megphias, Mosollam, Hazir,
Mesizabel, Sadoc, Jeddua,
Pheltia, Hanan, Anaia,
Osee, Hanania, Hasub,
Alohes, Phalea, Sobec,
Rehum, Hasebna, Maasia,
Echaia, Hanan, Anan,
Melluch, Haran, Baana:
And the rest of the people, priests, Levites, porters, and
singing men, Nathinites, and all that had separated themselves from the
people of the lands to the law of God, their wives, their sons, and
their daughters.
All that could understand, promising for their brethren, with
their chief men, and they came to promise, and swear that they would
walk in the law of God, which he gave in the hand of Moses the servant
of God, that they would do and keep all the commandments of the Lord our
And that we would not give our daughters to the people of the
land, nor take their daughters for our sons.
And if the people of the land bring in things to sell, or any
things for use, to sell them on the sabbath day, that we would not buy
them on the sabbath, or on the holy day. And that we would leave the
seventh year, and the exaction of every hand.
And we made ordinances for ourselves, to give the third part of a
sicle every year for the work of the house of our God,
For the loaves of proposition, and for the continual sacrifice,
and for a continual holocaust on the sabbaths, on the new moons, on the
set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offering: that
atonement might be made for Israel, and for every use of the house of
our God.
And we cast lots among the priests, and the Levites, and the
people for the offering of wood, that it might be brought into the house
of our God by the houses of our fathers at set times, from year to year:
to burn upon the altar of the Lord our God, as it is written in the law
of Moses:
And that we would bring the firstfruits of our land, and the
firstfruits of all fruit of every tree, from year to year, in the house
of our Lord.
And the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is
written in the law, and the firstlings of our oxen, and of our sheep, to
be offered in the house of our God, to the priests who minister in the
house of our God.
And that we would bring the firstfruits of our meats, and of our
libations, and the fruit of every tree, of the vintage also and of oil
to the priests, to the storehouse of our God, and the tithes of our
ground to the Levites. The Levites also shall receive the tithes of our
works out of all the cities.
And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites in the
tithes of the Levites, and the Levites shall offer the tithe of their
tithes in the house of our God, to the storeroom into the treasure
house.
For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall carry
to the treasury the firstfruits of corn, of wine, and of oil: and the
sanctified vessels shall be there, and the priests, and the singing men,
and the porters, and ministers, and we will not forsake the house of our
And the princes of the people dwelt at Jerusalem: but the rest of
the people cast lots, to take one part in ten to dwell in Jerusalem the
holy city, and nine parts in the other cities.
And the people blessed all the men that willingly offered
themselves to dwell in Jerusalem.
These therefore are the chief men of the province, who dwelt in
possession, in their cities: Israel, the priests, the Levites, the
And in Jerusalem there dwelt some of the children of Juda, and
some of the children of Benjamin: of the children of Juda, Athaias the
son of Aziam, the son of Zacharias, the son of Amarias, the son of
Maasia the son of Baruch, the son of Cholhoza, the son of Hazia,
the son of Adaia, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zacharias, the son of
the Silonite:
All these the sons of Phares, who dwelt in Jerusalem, were four
hundred sixty-eight valiant men.
And these are the children of Benjamin: Sellum the son of
son of Masia, the son of Etheel, the son of Isaia.
And after him Gebbai, Sellai, nine hundred twenty-eight.
And Joel the son of Zechri their ruler, and Judas the son of Senua
was second over the city.
And of the priests Idaia the son of Joarib, Jachin,
Saraia the son of Helcias, the son of Mosollam, the son of Sadoc,
the son of Meraioth, the son of Achitob the prince of the house of God,
And their brethren that do the works of the temple: eight hundred
twenty-two. And Adaia the son of Jeroham, the son of Phelelia, the son
of Amsi, the son of Zacharias, the son of Pheshur, the son of Melchias,
And his brethren the chiefs of the fathers: two hundred forty-
two. And Amassai the son of Azreel, the son of Ahazi, the son of
And their brethren who were very mighty, a hundred twenty-eight:
and their ruler Zabdiel son of the mighty.
And of the Levites Semeia the son of Hasub, the son of Azaricam,
the son of Hasabia, the son of Boni,
And Sabathai and Jozabed, who were over all the outward business
of the house of God, of the princes of the Levites,
And Mathania the son of Micha, the son of Zebedei, the son of
the son of Galal, the son of Idithun.
All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred eighty-four.
And the porters, Accub, Telmon, and their brethren, who kept the
doors: a hundred seventy-two.
And the rest of Israel, the priests and the Levites were in all
the cities of Juda, every man in his possession.
And the Nathinites, that dwelt in Ophel, and Siaha, and Gaspha of
the Nathinites.
And the overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem, was Azzi the son of
sons of Asaph, were the singing men in the ministry of the house of God.
For the king's commandment was concerning them, and an order
among the singing men day by day.
And Phathahia the son of Mesezebel of the children of Zara the
son of Juda was at the hand of the king, in all matters concerning the
people,
And in the houses through all their countries. Of the children of
thereof.
And at Jesue, and at Molada, and at Bethphaleth,
And at Hasersuel, and at Bersabee, and in the villages thereof,
And at Siceleg, and at Mochona, and in the villages thereof,
And at Remmon, and at Saraa, and at Jerimuth,
Zanoa, Odollam, and in their villages, at Lachis and its
dependencies, and at Azeca and the villages thereof. And they dwelt from
And the children of Benjamin, from Geba, at Mechmas, and at Hai,
and at Bethel, and in the villages thereof,
At Anathoth, Nob, Anania,
Asor, Rama, Gethaim,
Hadid, Seboim, and Neballat, Lod,
And Ono the valley of craftsmen.
And of the Levites were portions of Juda and Benjamin.
high priests: the solemnity of the dedication of the wall.
Now these are the priests and the Levites, that went up with
Amaria, Melluch, Hattus,
Sebenias, Rheum, Merimuth,
Addo, Genthon, Abia,
Miamin, Madia, Belga,
Semeia, and Joiarib, Idaia, Sellum Amoc, Helcias,
Idaia. These were the chief of the priests, and of their brethren
in the days of Josue.
And the Levites, Jesua, Bennui, Cedmihel, Sarebia, Juda,
And Becbecia, and Hanni, and their brethren every one in his
office.
And Josue begot Joacim, and Joacim begot Eliasib, and Eliasib
begot Joiada,
And Joiada begot Jonathan and Jonathan begot Jeddoa.
And in the days of Joacim the priests and heads of the families
were: Of Saraia, Maraia: of Jeremias, Hanania:
Of Esdras, Mosollam: and of Amaria, Johanan:
Of Milicho, Jonathan: of Sebenia, Joseph:
Of Haram, Edna: of Maraioth, Helci:
Of Adaia, Zacharia: of Genthon, Mosollam:
Of Abia, Zechri: of Miamin and Moadia, Phelti:
Of Belga, Sammua of Semaia, Jonathan:
Of Joiarib, Mathanai: of Jodaia, Azzi:
Of Sellai, Celai: of Amoc, Heber:
Of Helcias, Hasebia: of Idaia, Nathanael.
The Levites the chiefs of the families in the days of Eliasib,
and Joiada, and Johanan, and Jeddoa, were recorded, and the priests in
the reign of Darius the Persian.
The sons of Levi, heads of the families were written in the book
of Chronicles, even unto the days of Jonathan the son of Eliasib.
Now the chief of the Levites were Hasebia, Serebia, and Josue the
son of Cedmihel: and their brethren by their courses, to praise and to
give thanks according to the commandment of David the man of God, and to
wait equally in order.
Mathania, and Becbecia, Obedia, and Mosollam, Telmon, Accub, were
keepers of the gates and of the entrances before the gates.
These were in the days of Joacim the son of Josue, the son of
priest and scribe.
And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the
the dedication, and to rejoice with thanksgiving, and with singing, and
with cymbals, and psalteries and harps.
And the sons of the singing men were gathered together out of the
plain country about Jerusalem, and out of the villages of Nethuphati,
And from the house of Galgal, and from the countries of Geba and
And the priests and the Levites were purified, and they purified
the people, and the gates, and the wall.
And I made the princes of Juda go up upon the wall, and I
appointed two great choirs to give praise. And they went on the right
hand upon the wall toward the dung gate.
And after them went Osaias, and half of the princes of Juda,
And Azarias, Esdras, and Mosollam, Judas, and Benjamin, and
And of the sons of the priests with trumpets, Zacharias the son
of Jonathan, the son of Semeia, the son of Mathania, the son of Michaia,
the son of Zechur, the son of Asaph,
And his brethren Semeia, and Azareel, Malalai, Galalai, Maai,
the man of God: and Esdras the scribe before them at the fountain gate.
And they went up over against them by the stairs of the city of
water gate eastward:
And the second choir of them that gave thanks went on the
opposite side, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the
wall, and upon the tower of the furnaces, even to the broad wall,
And above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and above
the fish gate and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Emath, and
even to the flock gate: and they stood still in the watch gate.
And the two choirs of them that gave praise stood still at the
house of God, and I and the half of the magistrates with me.
And the priests, Eliachim, Maasia, Miamin, Michea, Elioenai,
And Maasia, and Semeia, and Eleazar, and Azzi, and Johanan, and
their overseer:
And they sacrificed on that day great sacrifices, and they
rejoiced: for God had made them joyful with great joy: their wives also
and their children rejoiced, and the joy of Jerusalem was heard afar
off.
They appointed also in that day men over the storehouses of the
treasure, for the libations, and for the firstfruits, and for the
tithes, that the rulers of the city might bring them in by them in
honour of thanksgiving, for the priests and Levites: for Juda was joyful
in the priests and Levites that assisted.
And they kept the watch of their God, and the observance of
expiation, and the singing men, and the porters, according to the
commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.
For in the days of David and Asaph from the beginning there were
chief singers appointed, to praise with canticles, and give thanks to
And all Israel, in the days of Zorobabel, and in the days of
day, and they sanctified the Levites, and the Levites sanctified the
sons of Aaron.
aside, and sanctified for their use.
And on that day they read in the book of Moses in the hearing of
the people: and therein was found written, that the Ammonites and the
Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and water:
and they hired against them Balaam, to curse them, and our God turned
the curse into blessing.
And it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they
separated every stranger from Israel.
And over this thing was Eliasib the priest, who was set over the
treasury of the house of our God, and was near akin to Tobias.
kind.
And he made him a great storeroom, where before him they laid up
gifts, and frankincense, and vessels, and the tithes of the corn, of the
wine, and of the oil, the portions of the Levites, and of the singing
men, and of the porters, and the firstfruits of the priests.
But in all this time I was not in Jerusalem, because in the two
and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon, I went to the king,
and after certain days I asked the king:
And I came to Jerusalem, and I understood the evil that Eliasib
had done for Tobias, to make him a storehouse in the courts of the house
of God.
And it seemed to me exceeding evil. And I cast forth the vessels
of the house of Tobias out of the storehouse.
And I commanded and they cleansed again the vessels of the house
of God, the sacrifice, and the frankincense.
And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been
given them: and that the Levites, and the singing men, and they that
ministered were fled away every man to his own country:
And I pleaded the matter against the magistrates, and said: Why
have we forsaken the house of God? And I gathered them together, and I
made them to stand in their places.
And all Juda brought the tithe of the corn, and the wine, and the
oil into the storehouses.
And we set over the storehouses Selemias the priest, and Sadoc
the scribe, and of the Levites Phadaia, and next to them Hanan the son
of Zachur, the son of Mathania: for they were approved as faithful, and
to them were committed the portions of their brethren.
Remember me, O my God, for this thing, and wipe not out my
kindnesses, which I have done relating to the house of my God and his
ceremonies.
In those days I saw in Juda some treading the presses on the
sabbath, and carrying sheaves, and lading asses with wine, and grapes,
and figs, and all manner of burthens, and bringing them into Jerusalem
on the sabbath day. And I charged them that they should sell on a day on
which it was lawful to sell.
Some Tyrians also dwelt there, who brought fish, and all manner
of wares: and they sold them on the sabbaths to the children of Juda in
And I rebuked the chief men of Juda, and said to them: What is
this evil thing that you are doing, profaning the sabbath day:
Did not our fathers do these things, and our God brought all this
evil upon us, and upon this city? And you bring more wrath upon Israel
by violating the sabbath.
And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem were at
rest on the sabbath day, I spoke: and they shut the gates, and I
commanded that they should not open them till after the sabbath: and I
set some of my servants at the gates, that none should bring in burthens
on the sabbath day.
So the merchants, and they that sold all kinds of wares, stayed
without Jerusalem, once or twice.
And I charged them, and I said to them: Why stay you before the
wall? if you do so another time, I will lay hands on you. And from that
time they came no more on the sabbath.
I spoke also to the Levites that they should be purified, and
should come to keep the gates, and to sanctify the sabbath day: for this
also remember me, O my God, and spare me according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies.
In those days also I saw Jews that married wives, women of
And their children spoke half in the speech of Azotus, and could
not speak the Jews' language, but they spoke according to the language
of this and that people.
And I chid them, and laid my curse upon them. And I beat some of
them, and shaved off their hair, and made them swear by God that they
would not give their daughters to their sons, nor take their daughters
for their sons, nor for themselves, saying:
Did not Solomon king of Israel sin in this kind of thing: and
surely among many nations, there was not a king like him, and he was
beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel: and yet women
of other countries brought even him to sin.
And shall we also be disobedient and do all this great evil to
transgress against our God, and marry strange women:
And one of the sons of Joiada the son of Eliasib the high priest,
was son-in-law to Sanaballat the Horonite, and I drove him from me.
Remember them, O Lord my God, that defile the priesthood, and the
law of priests and Levites.
So I separated from them all strangers, and I appointed the
courses of the priests and the Levites, every man in his ministry:
And for the offering of wood at times appointed, and for the
firstfruits: remember me, O my God, unto good. Amen.
virtues are herein recorded. It contains most excellent documents of
great piety, extraordinary patience, and of a perfect resignation to the
will of God. His humble prayer was heard, and the angel Raphael was sent
to relieve him: he is thankful and praises the Lord, calling on the
children of Israel to do the same. Having lived to the age of one
hundred and two years, he exhorts his son and grandsons to piety,
foretells the destruction of Ninive and the rebuilding of Jerusalem: he
dies happily.
