whom she calleth Samuel: and presenteth him to the service of God in
There was a man of Ramathaimsophim, of Mount Ephraim, and his name
was Elcana, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliu, the son of Thohu, the
son of Suph, an Ephraimite:
called an Ephraimite from dwelling in mount Ephraim.
And he had two wives, the name of one was Anna, and the name of the
other Phenenna. Phenenna had children: but Anna had no children.
And this man went up out of his city upon the appointed days, to
adore and to offer sacrifice to the Lord of hosts in Silo. And the two
sons of Heli, Ophni and Phinees, were there priests of the Lord.
Now the day came, and Elcana offered sacrifice, and gave to
But to Anna he gave one portion with sorrow, because he loved Anna.
Her rival also afflicted her, and troubled her exceedingly,
insomuch that she upbraided her, that the Lord had shut up her womb:
And thus she did every year, when the time returned, that they went
up to the temple of the Lord: and thus she provoked her: but Anna wept,
and did not eat.
Then Elcana, her husband, said to her: Anna, why weepest thou? and
why dost thou not eat? and why dost thou afflict thy heart? Am not I
better to thee than ten children?
So Anna arose after she had eaten and drunk in Silo: And Heli, the
priest, sitting upon a stool before the door of the temple of the Lord;
As Anna had her heart full of grief, she prayed to the Lord,
shedding many tears,
And she made a vow, saying: O Lord of hosts, if thou wilt look
down, and wilt be mindful of me, and not forget thy handmaid, and wilt
give to thy servant a manchild: I will give him to the Lord all the days
of his life, and no razor shall come upon his head.
And it came to pass, as she multiplied prayers before the Lord,
that Heli observed her mouth.
Now Anna spoke in her heart, and only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard at all. Heli therefore thought her to be drunk,
And said to her: How long wilt thou be drunk? digest a little the
wine, of which thou hast taken too much.
Anna answering, said: Not so, my lord: for I am an exceeding
unhappy woman, and have drunk neither wine nor any strong drink, but I
have poured out my soul before the Lord.
Count not thy handmaid for one of the daughters of Belial: for out
of the abundance of my sorrow and grief have I spoken till now.
Then Heli said to her: Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant
thee thy petition, which thou hast asked of him.
And she said: Would to God thy handmaid may find grace in thy
eyes. So the woman went on her way, and ate, and her countenance was no
more changed.
And they rose in the morning, and worshipped before the Lord: and
they returned, and came into their house at Ramatha. And Elcana knew
And it came to pass when the time was come about, Anna conceived
and bore a son, and called his name Samuel: because she had asked him of
the Lord.
And Elcana, her husband, went up, and all his house, to offer to
the Lord the solemn sacrifice, and his vow.
But Anna went not up: for she said to her husband: I will not go
till the child be weaned, and till I may carry him, that he may appear
before the Lord, and may abide always there.
And Elcana, her husband, said to her: Do what seemeth good to
thee, and stay till thou wean him: and I pray that the Lord may fulfil
his word. So the woman staid at home, and gave her son suck, till she
weaned him.
And after she had weaned him, she carried him with her, with three
calves, and three bushels of flour, and a bottle of wine, and she
brought him to the house of the Lord in Silo. Now the child was as yet
very young:
And they immolated a calf, and offered the child to Heli.
And Anna said: I beseech thee, my lord, as thy soul liveth, my
lord: I am that woman, who stood before thee here praying to the Lord.
For this child did I pray, and the Lord hath granted me my
petition, which I asked of him.
Therefore I also have lent him to the Lord all the days of his
life, he shall be lent to the Lord. And they adored the Lord there. And
are not duly corrected by their father. A prophecy against the house of
My heart hath rejoiced in the Lord, and my horn is exalted in my
salvation.
horn is said to be exalted, when a person receives an increase of
strength or glory.
There is none holy as the Lord is: for there is no other beside
thee, and there is none strong like our God.
Do not multiply to speak lofty things, boasting: let old matters
depart from your mouth: for the Lord is a God of all knowledge, and to
him are thoughts prepared.
The bow of the mighty is overcome, and the weak are girt with
strength.
They that were full before, have hired out themselves for bread:
and the hungry are filled, so that the barren hath borne many: and she
that had many children is weakened.
The Lord killeth and maketh alive, he bringeth down to hell, and
bringeth back again.
The Lord maketh poor and maketh rich, he humbleth and he exalteth:
He raiseth up the needy from the dust, and lifteth up the poor from
the dunghill: that he may sit with princes, and hold the throne of
glory. For the poles of the earth are the Lord's, and upon them he hath
set the world.
He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent
in darkness; because no man shall prevail by his own strength.
The adversaries of the Lord shall fear him: and upon them shall he
thunder in the heavens: The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and
he shall give empire to his king, and shall exalt the horn of his
And Elcana went to Ramatha, to his house: but the child ministered
in the sight of the Lord before the face of Heli the priest.
Now the sons of Heli were children of Belial, not knowing the
Nor the office of the priests to the people: but whosoever had
offered a sacrifice, the servant of the priest came, while the flesh was
in boiling, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand,
And thrust it into the kettle, or into the cauldron, or into the
pot, or into the pan: and all that the fleshhook brought up, the priest
took to himself. Thus did they to all Israel that came to Silo.
Also before they burnt the fat, the servant of the priest came,
and said to the man that sacrificed: Give me flesh to boil for the
priest: for I will not take of thee sodden flesh, but raw.
And he that sacrificed said to him: Let the fat first be burnt to
day, according to the custom, and then take to thee as much as thy soul
desireth. But he answered, and said to him: Not so: but thou shalt give
it me now, or else I will take it by force.
Wherefore the sin of the young men was exceeding great before the
But Samuel ministered before the face of the Lord: being a child
girded with a linen ephod.
And his mother made him a little coat, which she brought to him on
the appointed days, when she went up with her husband, to offer the
solemn sacrifice.
And Heli blessed Elcana and his wife: and he said to him: The Lord
give thee seed of this woman, for the loan thou hast lent to the Lord.
And the Lord visited Anna, and she conceived, and bore three sons,
and two daughters: and the child Samuel became great before the Lord.
Now Heli was very old, and he heard all that his sons did to all
tabernacle:
And he said to them: Why do ye these kinds of things, which I
hear, very wicked things, from all the people?
Do not so, my sons: for it is no good report that I hear, that you
make the people of the Lord to transgress.
If one man shall sin against another, God may be appeased in his
behalf: but if a man shall sin against the Lord, who shall pray for him?
would slay them.
understand, that by their wicked abuse of sacred things, and of the very
sacrifices which were appointed to appease the Lord, they deprived
themselves of the ordinary means of reconciliation with God; which was
by sacrifices. The more, because they were the chief priests whose
business it was to intercede for all others, they had no other to offer
sacrifices and to make atonement for them. Ibid. Because the Lord would
slay them... In consequence of their manifold sacrileges, he would not
soften their hearts with his efficacious grace, but was determined to
destroy them.
But the child Samuel advanced, and grew on, and pleased both the
And there came a man of God to Heli, and said to him: Thus saith
the Lord: Did I not plainly appear to thy father's house, when they were
in Egypt in the house of Pharao?
And I chose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest,
to go up to my altar, and burn incense to me, and to wear the ephod
before me: and I gave to thy father's house of all the sacrifices of the
children of Israel.
Why have you kicked away my victims, and my gifts which I
commanded to be offered in the temple: and thou hast rather honoured thy
sons than me, to eat the firstfruits of every sacrifice of my people
Wherefore thus saith the Lord the God of Israel: I said indeed
that thy house, and the house of thy father, should minister in my
sight, for ever. But now saith the Lord: Far be this from me: but
whosoever shall glorify me, him will I glorify: but they that despise
me, shall be despised.
Behold the days come: and I will cut off thy arm, and the arm of
thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thy house.
And thou shalt see thy rival in the temple, in all the prosperity
of Israel, and there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever.
more fully accomplished in the New Testament, when the priesthood of
However, I will not altogether take away a man of thee from my
altar: but that thy eyes may faint, and thy soul be spent: and a great
part of thy house shall die, when they come to man's estate.
And this shall be a sign to thee, that shall come upon thy two
sons, Ophni and Phinees: in one day they shall both of them die.
And I will raise me up a faithful priest, who shall do according
to my heart, and my soul and I will build him a faithful house, and he
shall walk all days before my anointed.
And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall remain in thy
house shall come that he may be prayed for, and shall offer a piece of
silver, and a roll of bread, and shall say: Put me, I beseech thee, to
somewhat of the priestly office, that I may eat a morsel of bread.
that shall fall on Heli, and his house.
Now the child Samuel ministered to the Lord before Heli, and the
word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no manifest
vision.
And it came to pass one day when Heli lay in his place, and his
eyes were grown dim, that he could not see:
Before the lamp of God went out, Samuel slept in the temple of the
And the Lord called Samuel. And he answered: Here am I.
And he ran to Heli, and said: Here am I: for thou didst call me. He
said: I did not call: go back and sleep. And he went and slept.
And the Lord called Samuel again. And Samuel arose and went to
call thee, my son: return and sleep.
Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither had the word of the
And the Lord called Samuel again the third time. And he arose up
and went to Heli,
And said: Here am I: for thou didst call me. Then Heli understood
that the Lord called the child, and he said to Samuel: Go, and sleep:
and if he shall call thee any more, thou shalt say: Speak, Lord, for thy
servant heareth. So Samuel went, and slept in his place.
And the Lord came, and stood, and he called, as he had called the
other times, Samuel, Samuel. And Samuel said: Speak, Lord, for thy
servant heareth.
And the Lord said to Samuel: Behold I do a thing in Israel: and
whosoever shall hear it, both his ears shall tingle.
In that day I will raise up against Heli all the things I have
spoken concerning his house: I will begin, and I will make an end.
For I have foretold unto him, that I will judge his house for
ever, for iniquity, because he knew that his sons did wickedly, and did
not chastise them.
Therefore have I sworn to the house of Heli, that the iniquity of
his house shall not be expiated with victims nor offerings for ever.
And Samuel slept till morning, and opened the doors of the house
of the Lord. And Samuel feared to tell the vision to Heli.
Then Heli called Samuel, and said: Samuel, my son. And he
answered: Here am I.
And he asked him: What is the word that the Lord hath spoken to
thee? I beseech thee hide it not from me. May God do so and so to thee,
and add so and so, if thou hide from me one word of all that were said
to thee.
So Samuel told him all the words, and did not hide them from him.
And Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and not one of his
words fell to the ground.
And all Israel, from Dan to Bersabee, knew that Samuel was a
faithful prophet of the Lord.
And the Lord again appeared in Silo, for the Lord revealed himself
to Samuel in Silo, according to the word of the Lord. And the word of
taken: upon the hearing of the news Heli falleth backward and dieth.
And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered
themselves together to fight: and Israel went out to war against the
to Aphec,
the Lord was pleased afterwards to give to his people Israel in that
place, by the prayers of Samuel, chap. 7.12.
And put their army in array against Israel. And when they had
joined battle, Israel turned their backs to the Philistines: and there
were slain in that fight, here and there in the fields, about four
thousand men.
And the people returned to the camp: and the ancients of Israel
said: Why hath the Lord defeated us to day before the Philistines? Let
us fetch unto us the ark of the covenant of the Lord from Silo, and let
it come in the midst of us, that it may save us from the hand of our
enemies.
So the people sent to Silo, and they brought from thence the ark of
the covenant of the Lord of hosts, sitting upon the cherubims: and the
two sons of Heli, Ophni and Phinees, were with the ark of the covenant
of God.
And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord was come into the
camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, and the earth rang again.
And the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, and they said:
understood that the ark of the Lord was come into the camp.
And the Philistines were afraid, saying: God is come into the camp.
Woe to us: for there was no such great joy yesterday, and the day
before: Woe to us. Who shall deliver us from the hand of these high
desert.
Take courage, and behave like men, ye Philistines: lest you come to
be servants to the Hebrews, as they have served you: take courage and
fight.
So the Philistines fought, and Israel was overthrown, and every
man fled to his own dwelling: and there was an exceeding great
slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
And the ark of God was taken: and the two sons of Heli, Ophni and
And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Silo
the same day, with his clothes rent, and his head strewed with dust.
And when he was come, Heli sat upon a stool over against the way,
watching. For his heart was fearful for the ark of God. And when the man
was come into the city, he told it: and all the city cried out.
And Heli heard the noise of the cry, and he said: What meaneth the
noise of this uproar? But he made haste, and came, and told Heli.
Now Heli was ninety and eight years old, and his eyes were dim,
and he could not see.
And he said to Heli: I am he that came from the battle, and have
fled out of the field this day. And he said to him: What is there done,
my son?
And he that brought the news answered, and said: Israel is fled
before the Philistines, and there has been a great slaughter of the
people: moreover thy two sons, Ophni and Phinees, are dead: and the ark
of God is taken.
And when he had named the ark of God, he fell from his stool
backwards by the door, and broke his neck and died. For he was an old
man, and far advanced in years: And he judged Israel forty years.
to hope that Heli died in a state of grace; and by his temporal
punishments escaped the eternal.
And his daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinees, was big with child,
and near her time: and hearing the news that the ark of God was taken,
and her father-in-law, and her husband, were dead, she bowed herself and
fell in labour: for her pains came upon her on a sudden.
And when she was upon the point of death, they that stood about
her said to her: Fear not, for thou hast borne a son. She answered them
not, nor gave heed to them.
And she called the child Ichabod, saying: The glory is gone from
for her husband:
how much the Israelites lamented the loss of the ark, which was but the
symbol of God's presence among them. How much more ought Christians to
lament the loss of God himself, when by sin they have driven him out of
their souls.
And she said: The glory is departed from Israel, because the ark
of God was taken.
afflicted, wherever the ark cometh.
And the Philistines took the ark of God, and carried it from the
And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it into the
temple of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.
And when the Azotians arose early the next day, behold Dagon lay
upon his face on the ground before the ark of the Lord: and they took
And the next day again, when they rose in the morning, they found
the head of Dagon, and both the palms of his hands, were cut off upon
the threshold:
And only the stump of Dagon remained in its place. For this cause
neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that go into the temple, tread on
the threshold of Dagon in Azotus unto this day.
And the hand of the Lord was heavy upon the Azotians, and he
destroyed them, and afflicted Azotus and the coasts thereof with
emerods. And in the villages and fields in the midst of that country,
there came forth a multitude of mice, and there was the confusion of a
great mortality in the city.
And the men of Azotus seeing this kind of plague, said: The ark of
the God of Israel shall not stay with us: for his hand is heavy upon us,
and upon Dagon, our god.
And sending, they gathered together all the lords of the
of Israel? And the Gethites answered: Let the ark of the God of Israel
be carried about. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about.
And while they were carrying it about, the hand of the Lord came
upon every city with an exceeding great slaughter: and he smote the men
of every city, both small and great, and they had emerods in their
secret parts. And the Gethites consulted together, and made themselves
seats of skins.
Therefore they sent the ark of God into Accaron. And when the ark
of God was come into Accaron, the Accaronites cried out, saying: They
have brought the ark of the God of Israel to us, to kill us and our
people.
They sent therefore, and gathered together all the lords of the
let it return into its own place, and not kill us and our people.
For there was the fear of death in every city, and the hand of God
was exceeding heavy. The men also that did not die, were afflicted with
the emerods: and the cry of every city went up to heaven.
through curiosity into it.
Now the ark of God was in the land of the Philistines seven months.
And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
saying: What shall we do with the ark of the Lord? tell us how we are to
send it back to its place. And they said:
If you send back the ark of the God of Israel, send it not away
empty, but render unto him what you owe for sin, and then you shall be
healed: and you shall know why his hand departeth not from you.
They answered: What is it we ought to render unto him for sin? and
they answered:
According to the number of the provinces of the Philistines you
shall make five golden emerods, and five golden mice: for the same
plague hath been upon you all, and upon your lords. And you shall make
the likeness of your emerods, and the likeness of the mice, that have
destroyed the land, and you shall give glory to the God of Israel: to
see if he will take off his hand from you, and from your gods, and from
your land.
Why do you harden your hearts, as Egypt and Pharao hardened their
hearts? did not he, after he was struck, then let them go, and they
departed?
Now, therefore, take and make a new cart: and two kine that have
calved, on which there hath come no yoke, tie to the cart, and shut up
their calves at home.
And you shall take the ark of the Lord, and lay it on the cart, and
the vessels of gold, which you have paid him for sin, you shall put into
a little box at the side thereof: and send it away, that it may go.
And you shall look: and if it go up by the way of his own coasts,
towards Bethsames, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, we
shall know that it is not his hand hath touched us, but it hath happened
by chance.
They did therefore in this manner: and taking two kine, that had
sucking calves, they yoked them to the cart, and shut up their calves at
home.
And they laid the ark of God upon the cart, and the little box
that had in it the golden mice, and the likeness of the emerods.
And the kine took the straight way, that leadeth to Bethsames, and
they went along the way, lowing as they went: and turned not aside
neither to the right hand nor to the left: and the lords of the
Now the Bethsamites were reaping wheat in the valley: and lifting
up their eyes, they saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.
And the cart came into the field of Josue, a Bethsamite, and stood
there. And there was a great stone, and they cut in pieces the wood of
the cart, and laid the kine upon it a holocaust to the Lord.
And the Levites took down the ark of God, and the little box that
was at the side of it, wherein were the vessels of gold, and they put
them upon the great stone. The men also of Bethsames offered holocausts,
and sacrificed victims that day to the Lord.
And the five princes of the Philistines saw, and they returned to
And these are the golden emerods, which the Philistines returned
for sin to the Lord: For Azotus one, for Gaza one, for Ascalon one, for
And the golden mice, according to the number of the cities of the
that was without wall, and to the great Abel (the stone) whereon they
set down the ark of the Lord, which was till that day in the field of
But he slew of the men of Bethsames, because they had seen the ark
of the Lord, and he slew of the people seventy men, and fifty thousand
of the common people. And the people lamented, because the Lord had
smitten the people with a great slaughter.
all the neighbouring country, as well as the city of Bethsames.
And the men of Bethsames said: Who shall be able to stand before
the Lord this holy God? and to whom shall he go up from us?
And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Cariathiarim,
saying: The Philistines have brought back the ark of the Lord, come ye
down and fetch it up to you.
cast away their idols and serve God alone. The Lord defeateth the
And the men of Cariathiarim came, and fetched up the ark of the
sanctified Eleazar, his son, to keep the ark of the Lord.
And it came to pass, that from the day the ark of the Lord abode in
and all the house of Israel rested, following the Lord.
And Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel, saying: If you turn to
the Lord with all your heart, put away the strange gods from among you,
him only, and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.
Then the children of Israel put away Baalim and Astaroth, and
served the Lord only.
And Samuel said: Gather all Israel to Masphath, that I may pray to
the Lord for you.
And they gathered together to Masphath, and they drew water, and
poured it out before the Lord, and they fasted on that day, and they
said there: We have sinned against the Lord. And Samuel judged the
children of Israel in Masphath.
And the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered
together to Masphath, and the lords of the Philistines went up against
the Philistines.
And they said to Samuel: Cease not to cry to the Lord our God for
us, that he may save us out of the hand of the Philistines.
And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it whole for a
holocaust to the Lord: and Samuel cried to the Lord for Israel, and the
And it came to pass, when Samuel was offering the holocaust, the
a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and terrified them,
and they were overthrown before the face of Israel.
And the men of Israel going out of Masphath, pursued after the
And Samuel took a stone, and laid it between Masphath and Sen: and
he called the place The stone of help. And he said: Thus far the Lord
hath helped us.
And the Philistines were humbled, and they did not come any more
into the borders of Israel. And the hand of the Lord was against the
And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel, were
restored to Israel, from Accaron to Geth, and their borders: and he
delivered Israel from the hand of the Philistines, and there was peace
between Israel and the Amorrhites.
And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life:
And he went every year about to Bethel and to Galgal and to
And he returned to Ramatha: for there was his house, and there he
judged Israel: he built also there an altar to the Lord.
desire a king.
And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he appointed his
sons to be judges over Israel.
Now the name of his firstborn son was Joel: and the name of the
second was Abia, judges in Bersabee.
And his sons walked not in his ways: but they turned aside after
lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment.
Then all the ancients of Israel being assembled came to Samuel to
And they said to him: Behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not in
thy ways: make us a king, to judge us, as all nations have.
And the word was displeasing in the eyes of Samuel, that they
should say: Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed to the Lord.
And the Lord said to Samuel: Hearken to the voice of the people in
all that they say to thee. For they have not rejected thee, but me, that
in which God himself immediately ruled, by laws which he had enacted,
and by judges extraordinarily raised up by himself; and therefore he
complains that his people rejected him, in desiring a change of
government.
According to all their works, they have done from the day that I
brought them out of Egypt until this day: as they have forsaken me, and
served strange gods, so do they also unto thee.
Now, therefore, hearken to their voice: but yet testify to them,
and foretell them the right of the king, that shall reign over them.
having no one to control him, when he has the power in his hand.
Then Samuel told all the words of the Lord to the people that had
desired a king of him,
And said: This will be the right of the king that shall reign over
you: He will take your sons, and put them in his chariots, and will make
them his horsemen, and his running footmen, to run before his chariots,
And he will appoint of them to be his tribunes, and his
centurions, and to plough his fields, and to reap his corn, and to make
him arms and chariots.
Your daughters also he will take to make him ointments, and to be
his cooks, and bakers.
And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your best
oliveyards, and give them to his servants.
Moreover he will take the tenth of your corn, and of the revenues
of your vineyards, to give to his eunuchs and servants.
Your servants also, and handmaids, and your goodliest young men,
and your asses, he will take away, and put them to his work.
Your flocks also he will tithe, and you shall be his servants.
And you shall cry out in that day from the face of the king, whom
you have chosen to yourselves: and the Lord will not hear you in that
day, because you desired unto yourselves a king.
But the people would not hear the voice of Samuel, and they said,
And we also will be like all nations: and our king shall judge us,
and go out before us, and fight our battles for us.
And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and rehearsed them
in the ears of the Lord.
And the Lord said to Samuel: Hearken to their voice, and make them
a king. And Samuel said to the men of Israel: Let every man go to his
city.
entertained.
Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Cis, the son of
of a man of Jemini, valiant and strong.
And he had a son whose name was Saul, a choice and goodly man, and
there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he:
from his shoulders and upward he appeared above all the people.
And the asses of Cis, Saul's father, were lost: and Cis said to his
son Saul: Take one of the servants with thee, and arise, go, and seek
the asses. And when they had passed through Mount Ephraim,
And through the land of Salisa, and had not found them, they passed
also through the land of Salim, and they were not there: and through the
land of Jemini, and found them not.
And when they were come to the land of Suph, Saul said to the
servant that was with him: Come, let us return, lest perhaps my father
forget the asses, and be concerned for us.
And he said to him: Behold there is a man of God in this city, a
famous man: all that he saith, cometh certainly to pass. Now, therefore,
let us go thither, perhaps he may tell us of our way, for which we are
come.
And Saul said to his servant: Behold we will go: but what shall we
carry to the man of God? the bread is spent in our bags: and we have no
present to make to the man of God, nor any thing at all.
The servant answered Saul again, and said: Behold there is found in
my hand the fourth part of a sicle of silver, let us give it to the man
of God, that he may tell us our way.
Now in time past in Israel, when a man went to consult God, he
spoke thus: Come, let us go to the seer. For he that is now called a
prophet, in time past was called a seer.
to come.
And Saul said to his servant: Thy word is very good, come let us
go. And they went into the city, where the man of God was.
And when they went up the ascent to the city, they found maids
coming out to draw water, and they said to them: Is the seer here?
They answered and said to them: He is: behold he is before you,
make haste now: for he came to day into the city, for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place.
but at the tabernacle, or temple, in which the ark of the covenant was
kept; but Samuel, by divine dispensation, offered sacrifices in other
places. For which dispensation this reason may be alleged, that the
house of God in Silo, having lost the ark, was now cast off; as a figure
of the reprobation of the Jews, Ps. 77.60, 67. And in Cariathiarim where
the ark was, there was neither tabernacle, nor altar.-Ibid. The high
place... Excelsum. The excelsa, or high places, so often mentioned in
scripture, were places of worship, in which were altars for sacrifice.
present case: but more frequently in the service of idols; and were
called excelsa, which is commonly (though perhaps not so accurately)
rendered high places; not because they were always upon hills, for the
very worst of all, which was that of Topheth, or Geennom, (Jer. 19.) was
in a valley; but because of the high altars, and pillars, or monuments,
erected there, on which were set up the idols, or images of their
deities.
As soon as you come into the city, you shall immediately find him,
before he go up to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat
till he come; because he blesseth the victim, and afterwards they eat
that are invited. Now, therefore, go up, for to day you shall find him.
And they went up into the city. And when they were walking in the
midst of the city, behold Samuel was coming out over against them, to go
up to the high place.
Now the Lord had revealed to the ear of Samuel the day before Saul
came, saying:
To morrow about this same hour I will send thee a man of the land
of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be ruler over my people
for I have looked down upon my people, because their cry is come to me.
And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said to him: Behold the man, of
whom I spoke to thee, this man shall reign over my people.
And Saul came to Samuel in the midst of the gate, and said: Tell
me, I pray thee, where is the house of the seer?
And Samuel answered Saul, saying: I am the seer; go up before me
to the high place, that you may eat with me to day, and I will let thee
go in the morning: and tell thee all that is in thy heart.
And as for the asses, which were lost three days ago, be not
solicitous, because they are found. And for whom shall be all the best
things of Israel? Shall they not be for thee and for all thy father's
house?
And Saul answering, said: Am not I a son of Jemini of the least
tribe of Israel, and my kindred the last among all the families of the
tribe of Benjamin? Why then hast thou spoken this word to me?
Then Samuel taking Saul, and his servant, brought them into the
parlour, and gave them a place at the head of them that were invited.
And Samuel said to the cook: Bring the portion which I gave thee,
and commanded thee to set it apart by thee.
And the cook took up the shoulder, and set it before Saul. And
it was kept of purpose for thee, when I invited the people. And Saul ate
with Samuel that day.
And they went down from the high place into the town, and he spoke
with Saul upon the top of the house: and he prepared a bed for Saul on
the top of the house and he slept.
And when they were risen in the morning, and it began now to be
light, Samuel called Saul on the top of the house, saying: Arise, that I
may let thee go. And Saul arose: and they went out both of them: to wit,
he and Samuel.
And as they were going down in the end of the city, Samuel said to
still a while, that I may tell thee the word of the Lord.
And Samuel took a little vial of oil, and poured it upon his head,
and kissed him, and said: Behold, the Lord hath anointed thee to be
prince over his inheritance, and thou shalt deliver his people out of
the hands of their enemies, that are round about them. And this shall be
a sign unto thee, that God hath anointed thee to be prince.
When thou shalt depart from me this day, thou shalt find two men
by the sepulchre of Rachel in the borders of Benjamin to the south, and
they shall say to thee: The asses are found which thou wentest to seek:
and thy father, thinking no more of the asses, is concerned for you, and
saith: What shall I do for my son?
And when thou shalt depart from thence, and go farther on, and
shalt come to the oak of Thabor, there shall meet thee three men going
up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another three loaves
of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine.
the places where Samuel judged Israel.
And they will salute thee, and will give thee two loaves, and thou
shalt take them at their hand.
After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where the garrison
of the Philistines is: and when thou shalt be come there into the city,
thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place,
with a psaltery, and a timbrel, and a pipe, and a harp before them, and
they shall be prophesying.
place or altar.-Prophets... These were men whose office it was to sing
hymns and praises to God; for such in holy writ are called prophets, and
their singing praises to God is called prophesying. See 1 Par. alias 1
for training up these prophets; and it seems there was one of these
schools at this hill of God; and another at Najoth in Ramatha. See 1
And the Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shalt
prophesy with them, and shalt be changed into another man.
When therefore these signs shall happen to thee, do whatsoever thy
hand shall find, for the Lord is with thee.
And thou shalt go down before me to Galgal, (for I will come down
to thee), that thou mayst offer an oblation, and sacrifice victims of
peace: seven days shalt thou wait, till I come to thee, and I will shew
thee what thou art to do.
So when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave unto
him another heart, and all these things came to pass that day.
And they came to the foresaid hill, and behold a company of
prophets met him: and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he
prophesied in the midst of them.
And all that had known him yesterday and the day before, seeing
that he was with the prophets, and prophesied, said to each other: What
is this that hath happened to the son of Cis? is Saul also among the
prophets?
And one answered another, saying: And who is their father?
therefore it became a proverb: Is Saul also among the prophets?
And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high
place.
And Saul's uncle said to him, and to his servant: Whither went
you? They answered: To seek the asses: and not finding them, we went to
And his uncle said to him: Tell me what Samuel said to thee.
And Saul said to his uncle: He told us that the asses were found.
told him not.
And Samuel called together the people to the Lord in Maspha:
And he said to the children of Israel: Thus saith the Lord the
the hand of the Egyptians, and from the hand of all the kings who
afflicted you.
But you this day have rejected your God, who only hath saved you
out of all your evils and your tribulations: and you have said: Nay: but
set a king over us. Now therefore stand before the Lord by your tribes,
and by your families.
And Samuel brought to him all the tribes of Israel, and the lot
fell on the tribe of Benjamin.
And he brought the tribe of Benjamin and the kindreds thereof,
and the lot fell upon the kindred of Metri, and it came to Saul, the son
of Cis. They sought him therefore, and he was not found.
And after this they consulted the Lord whether he would come
thither. And the Lord answered: Behold he is hidden at home.
And they ran and fetched him thence: and he stood in the midst of
the people, and he was higher than any of the people from the shoulders
and upward.
And Samuel said to all the people: Surely you see him whom the
all the people cried and said: God save the king.
And Samuel told the people the law of the kingdom, and wrote it
in a book, and laid it up before the Lord: and Samuel sent away all the
people, every one to his own house.
Saul also departed to his own house in Gabaa: and there went with
him a part of the army, whose hearts God had touched.
But the children of Belial said: Shall this fellow be able to
save us? And they despised him, and brought him no presents; but he
dissembled as though he heard not.
And it came to pass about a month after this, that Naas, the
men of Jabes said to Naas: Make a covenant with us, and we will serve
thee.
And Naas, the Ammonite, answered them: On this condition will I
make a covenant with you, that I may pluck out all your right eyes, and
make you a reproach in all Israel.
And the ancients of Jabes said to him: Allow us seven days, that
we may send messengers to all the coasts of Israel: and if there be no
one to defend us, we will come out to thee.
The messengers therefore came to Gabaa of Saul: and they spoke
these words in the hearing of the people: and all the people lifted up
their voices, and wept.
And behold Saul came, following oxen out of the field, and he
said: What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the words
of the men of Jabes.
And the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, when he had heard these
words, and his anger was exceedingly kindled.
And taking both the oxen, he cut them in pieces, and sent them
into all the coasts of Israel, by messengers, saying: Whosoever shall
not come forth, and follow Saul and Samuel, so shall it be done to his
oxen. And the fear of the Lord fell upon the people, and they went out
as one man.
And he numbered them in Bezec: and there were of the children of
And they said to the messengers that came: Thus shall you say to
the men of Jabes Galaad: To morrow, when the sun shall be hot, you shall
have relief. The messengers therefore came, and told the men of Jabes,
and they were glad.
And they said: In the morning we will come out to you: and you
shall do what you please with us.
And it came to pass, when the morrow was come, that Saul put the
people in three companies: and he came into the midst of the camp in the
morning watch, and he slew the Ammonites until the day grew hot, and the
rest were scattered, so that two of them were not left together.
And the people said to Samuel: Who is he that said: Shall Saul
reign over us? Bring the men, and we will kill them.
And Saul said: No man shall be killed this day: because the Lord
this day hath wrought salvation in Israel:
And Samuel said to the people: Come, and let us go to Galgal, and
let us renew the kingdom there.
And all the people went to Galgal, and there they made Saul king,
before the Lord in Galgal, and they sacrificed there victims of peace
before the Lord. And there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced
exceedingly.
that they had done ill in asking for a king.
And Samuel said to all Israel: Behold I have hearkened to your
voice in all that you said to me, and have made a king over you.
And now the king goeth before you: but I am old and greyheaded:
and my sons are with you: having then conversed with you from my youth
until this day, behold here I am.
Speak of me before the Lord, and before his anointed, whether I
have taken any man's ox, or ass: if I have wronged any man, if I have
oppressed any man, if I have taken a bribe at any man's hand: and I will
despise it this day, and will restore it to you.
And they said: Thou hast not wronged us, nor oppressed us, nor
taken ought at any man's hand.
And he said to them: The Lord is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that you have not found any thing in my
hand. And they said: He is witness.
And Samuel said to the people: It is the Lord who made Moses and
Now, therefore, stand up, that I may plead in judgment against you
before the Lord, concerning all the kindness of the Lord, which he hath
shewn to you, and to your fathers:
How Jacob went into Egypt, and your fathers cried to the Lord: and
the Lord sent Moses and Aaron, and brought your fathers out of Egypt,
and made them dwell in this place.
And they forgot the Lord their God, and he delivered them into the
hands of Sisara, captain of the army of Hasor, and into the hands of the
against them.
But afterwards they cried to the Lord, and said: We have sinned,
because we have forsaken the Lord, and have served Baalim and Astaroth:
but now deliver us from the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.
And the Lord sent Jerobaal, and Badan, and Jephte, and Samuel,
and delivered you from the hand of your enemies round about, and you
dwelt securely.
But seeing that Naas, king of the children of Ammon, was come
against you, you said to me: Nay, but a king shall reign over us:
whereas the Lord your God was your king.
Now, therefore, your king is here, whom you have chosen and
desired: Behold the Lord hath given you a king.
If you will fear the Lord, and serve him, and hearken to his
voice, and not provoke the mouth of the Lord: then shall both you, and
the king who reigneth over you, be followers of the Lord your God.
But if you will not hearken to the voice of the Lord, but will
rebel against his words, the hand of the Lord shall be upon you, and
upon your fathers.
Now then stand, and see this great thing which the Lord will do
in your sight.
Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call upon the Lord, and he
shall send thunder and rain: and you shall know, and see that you
yourselves have done a great evil in the sight of the Lord, in desiring
a king over you.
in those countries.
And Samuel cried unto the Lord, and the Lord sent thunder and
rain that day.
And all the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel. And all
the people said to Samuel: Pray for thy servants to the Lord thy God,
that we may not die, for we have added to all our sins this evil, to ask
for a king.
And Samuel said to the people: Fear not, you have done all this
evil: but yet depart not from following the Lord, but serve the Lord
with all your heart.
And turn not aside after vain things, which shall never profit
you, nor deliver you, because they are vain.
And the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name's
sake: because the Lord hath sworn to make you his people.
And far from me be this sin against the Lord, that I should cease
to pray for you: and I will teach you the good and right way.
Therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, and with your
whole heart, for you have seen the great works which he hath done among
you.
But if you will still do wickedly: both you and your king shall
perish together.
which he is reproved.
Saul was a child of one year when he began to reign, and he
reigned two years over Israel.
two years continued in that innocency.
And Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel: and two thousand
were with Saul in Machmas, and in mount Bethel: and a thousand with
every man to their dwellings.
And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines which was in
trumpet over all the land, saying: Let the Hebrews hear.
And all Israel heard this report: Saul hath smitten the garrison
of the Philistines: and Israel took courage against the Philistines. And
the people were called together after Saul to Galgal.
The Philistines also were assembled to fight against Israel,
thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and a multitude of
people besides, like the sand on the seashore for number. And going up
they camped in Machmas, at the east of Bethaven.
And when the men of Israel saw that they were straitened (for the
people were distressed), they hid themselves in caves, and in thickets,
and in rocks, and in dens, and in pits.
And some of the Hebrews passed over the Jordan into the land of
followed him were greatly afraid.
And he waited seven days, according to the appointment of Samuel,
and Samuel came not to Galgal, and the people slipt away from him.
Then Saul said: Bring me the holocaust, and the peace offerings.
And when he had made an end of offering the holocaust, behold
And Samuel said to him: What hast thou done? Saul answered:
according to the days appointed, and the Philistines were gathered
together in Machmas,
I said: Now will the Philistines come down upon me to Galgal, and
the holocaust.
And Samuel said to Saul: Thou hast done foolishly, and hast not
kept the commandments of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee. And
if thou hadst not done thus, the Lord would now have established thy
kingdom over Israel for ever:
But thy kingdom shall not continue. The Lord hath sought him a
man according to his own heart: and him hath the Lord commanded to be
prince over his people, because thou hast not observed that which the
And Samuel arose and went up from Galgal to Gabaa of Benjamin.
fought against them, going from Galgal to Gabaa, in the hill of
six hundred men.
And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present
with them, were in Gabaa of Benjamin: But the Philistines encamped in
And there went out of the camp of the Philistines three companies
to plunder. One company went towards the way of Ephra to the land of
And another went by the way of Bethoron, and the third turned to
the way of the border, above the valley of Seboim towards the desert.
Now there was no smith to be found in all the land of Israel, for
the Philistines had taken this precaution, lest the Hebrews should make
them swords or spears.
So all Israel went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man
his ploughshare, and his spade, and his axe, and his rake.
So that their shares, and their spades, and their forks, and
their axes, were blunt, even to the goad, which was to be mended.
And when the day of battle was come, there was neither sword nor
spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and
And the army of the Philistines went out in order to advance
further in Machmas.
unadvised oath, by which Jonathan is put in danger of his life, but is
delivered by the people.
Now it came to pass one day that Jonathan, the son of Saul, said
to the young man that bore his armour: Come, and let us go over to the
garrison of the Philistines, which is on the other side of yonder place.
And Saul abode in the uttermost part of Gabaa, under the
pomegranate tree, which was in Magron: and the people with him were
about six hundred men.
And Achias, the son of Achitob, brother of Ichabod the son of
ephod. And the people knew not whither Jonathan was gone.
Now there were between the ascents, by which Jonathan sought to go
over to the garrison of the Philistines, rocks standing up on both
sides, and steep cliffs like teeth on the one side, and on the other,
the name of the one was Boses, and the name of the other was Sene:
One rock stood out toward the north, over against Machmas, and the
other to the south, over against Gabaa.
And Jonathan said to the young man that bore his armour: Come, let
us go over to the garrison of these uncircumcised, it may be the Lord
will do for us: because it is easy for the Lord to save either by many,
or by few.
And his armourbearer said to him: Do all that pleaseth thy mind:
go whither thou wilt, and I will be with thee wheresoever thou hast a
mind.
And Jonathan said: Behold we will go over to these men. And when
we shall be seen by them,
If they shall speak thus to us: Stay till we come to you: let us
stand still in our place, and not go up to them.
But if they shall say: Come up to us: let us go up, because the
inspiration to make a choice of this sign: otherwise the observation of
omens is superstitious and sinful.
So both of them discovered themselves to the garrison of the
of the holes wherein they were hid.
And the men of the garrison spoke to Jonathan, and to his
armourbearer, and said: Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing. And
hath delivered them into the hands of Israel.
And Jonathan went up creeping on his hands and feet, and his
armourbearer after him. And some fell before Jonathan, others his
armourbearer slew as he followed him.
And the first slaughter which Jonathan and his armourbearer made,
was of about twenty men, within half an acre of land, which a yoke of
oxen is wont to plough in a day.
And there was a miracle in the camp, in the fields: and all the
people of their garrison, who had gone out to plunder, were amazed, and
the earth trembled: and it happened as a miracle from God.
And the watchmen of Saul, who were in Gabaa of Benjamin looked,
and behold a multitude overthrown, and fleeing this way and that.
And Saul said to the people that were with him: Look, and see who
is gone from us. And when they had sought, it was found that Jonathan
and his armourbearer were not there.
And Saul said to Achias: Bring the ark of the Lord. (For the ark
of God was there that day with the children of Israel.)
And while Saul spoke to the priest, there arose a great uproar in
the camp of the Philistines: and it increased by degrees, and was heard
more clearly. And Saul said to the priest: Draw in thy hand.
Then Saul, and all the people that were with him, shouted
together, and they came to the place of the fight: and behold every
man's sword was turned upon his neighbour, and there was a very great
slaughter.
Moreover, the Hebrews that had been with the Philistines
yesterday and the day before, and went up with them into the camp,
returned to be with the Israelites, who were with Saul and Jonathan.
And all the Israelites that had hid themselves in mount Ephraim,
hearing that the Philistines fled, joined themselves with their
countrymen in the fight. And there were with Saul about ten thousand
men.
And the Lord saved Israel that day. And the fight went on as far
as Bethaven.
And the men of Israel were joined together that day: and Saul
adjured the people, saying: Cursed be the man that shall eat food till
evening, till I be revenged of my enemies. So none of the people tasted
any food.
And all the common people came into a forest, in which there was
honey upon the ground.
And when the people came into the forest, behold the honey
dropped, but no man put his hand to his mouth. For the people feared the
oath.
But Jonathan had not heard when his father adjured the people:
and he put forth the end of the rod, which he had in his hand, and dipt
it in a honeycomb: and he carried his hand to his mouth, and his eyes
were enlightened.
And one of the people answering, said: Thy father hath bound the
people with an oath, saying: Cursed be the man that shall eat any food
this day. (And the people were faint.)
And Jonathan said: My father hath troubled the land: you have
seen yourselves that my eyes are enlightened, because I tasted a little
of this honey:
How much more if the people had eaten of the prey of their
enemies, which they found? had there not been made a greater slaughter
among the Philistines?
So they smote that day the Philistines, from Machmas to Aialon.
And falling upon the spoils, they took sheep, and oxen, and
calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people ate them with the
blood.
And they told Saul that the people had sinned against the Lord,
eating with the blood. And he said: You have transgressed: roll here to
me now a great stone.
And Saul said: Disperse yourselves among the people, and tell
them to bring me every man his ox and his ram and slay them upon this
stone, and eat, and you shall not sin against the Lord, in eating with
the blood. So all the people brought every man his ox with him till the
night: and slew them there.
And Saul built an altar to the Lord: and he then first began to
build an altar to the Lord.
And Saul said: Let us fall upon the Philistines by night, and
destroy them till the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them.
priest said: Let us draw near hither unto God.
And Saul consulted the Lord: Shall I pursue after the
answered him not that day.
And Saul said: Bring hither all the corners of the people: and
know, and see by whom this sin hath happened to day.
As the Lord liveth, who is the Saviour of Israel, if it was done
by Jonathan, my son, he shall surely die. In this none of the people
gainsayed him.
And he said to all Israel: Be you on one side and I, with
And Saul said to the Lord: O Lord God of Israel, give a sign, by
which we may know, what the meaning is, that thou answerest not thy
servant to day: If this iniquity be in me, or in my son Jonathan, give a
proof: or if this iniquity be in thy people, give holiness. And Jonathan
and Saul were taken, and the people escaped.
And Saul said: Cast lots between me, and Jonathan, my son. And
ignorance of the prohibition, yet God was pleased on this occasion to
let the lot fall upon him, to shew unto all the great obligation of
obedience to princes and parents.
And Saul said to Jonathan: Tell me what thou hast done. And
of the rod, which was in my hand, and behold I must die.
And Saul said: May God do so and so to me, and add still more:
for dying thou shalt die, O Jonathan.
And the people said to Saul: Shall Jonathan then die, who hath
wrought this great salvation in Israel? this must not be: As the Lord
liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he
hath wrought with God this day. So the people delivered Jonathan, that
he should not die.
And Saul went back, and did not pursue after the Philistines: and
the Philistines went to their own places.
And Saul having his kingdom established over Israel, fought
against all his enemies round about, against Moab, and against the
children of Ammon, and Edom, and the kings of Soba, and the Philistines:
and whithersoever he turned himself, he overcame.
And gathering together an army, he defeated Amalec, and delivered
And the sons of Saul, were Jonathan, and Jessui, and Melchisua:
and the names of his two daughters, the name of the firstborn was Merob,
and the name of the younger Michol.
And the name of Saul's wife was Achinoam, the daughter of
For Cis was the father of Saul, and Ner, the father of Abner, was
son of Abiel.
And there was a great war against the Philistines all the days of
took him to himself.
their cattle: for which disobedience he is cast off by the Lord.
And Samuel said to Saul: The Lord sent me to anoint thee king over
his people Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the
Thus saith the Lord of hosts: I have reckoned up all that Amalec
hath done to Israel: how he opposed them in the way when they came up
out of Egypt.
Now therefore go, and smite Amalec, and utterly destroy all that
he hath: spare him not, nor covet anything that is his: but slay both
man and woman, child and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.
all mankind whilst they are children) has been pleased sometimes to
ordain that children should be put to the sword, in detestation of the
crimes of their parents, and that they might not live to follow the same
wicked ways. But without such ordinance of God it is not allowable, in
any wars, how just soever, to kill children.
So Saul commanded the people, and numbered them as lambs: two
hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand of the men of Juda.
And when Saul was come to the city of Amalec, he laid ambushes in
the torrent.
And Saul said to the Cinite: Go, depart, and get ye down from
all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. And the
And Saul smote Amalec from Hevila, until thou comest to Sur, which
is over against Egypt.
And he took Agag, the king of Amalec, alive: but all the common
people he slew with the edge of the sword.
And Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the flocks of
sheep, and of the herds, and the garments and the rams, and all that was
beautiful, and would not destroy them: but every thing that was vile,
and good for nothing, that they destroyed.
And the word of the Lord came to Samuel,
It repenteth me that I have made Saul king: for he hath forsaken
me, and hath not executed my commandments. And Samuel was grieved, and
he cried unto the Lord all night.
And when Samuel rose early, to go to Saul in the morning, it was
told Samuel that Saul was come to Carmel, and had erected for himself a
triumphant arch, and returning had passed on, and gone down to Galgal.
out of the choicest of the spoils, which he had brought from Amalec.
And when Samuel was come to Saul, Saul said to him: Blessed be
thou of the Lord, I have fulfilled the word of the Lord.
And Samuel said: What meaneth then this bleating of the flocks,
which soundeth in my ears, and the lowing of the herds, which I hear?
And Saul said: They have brought them from Amalec: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the herds, that they might be
sacrificed to the Lord thy God, but the rest we have slain.
And Samuel said to Saul: Suffer me, and I will tell thee what the
And Samuel said: When thou wast a little one in thy own eyes,
wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel? And the Lord
anointed thee to be king over Israel.
And the Lord sent thee on the way, and said: Go, and kill the
sinners of Amalec, and thou shalt fight against them until thou hast
utterly destroyed them.
Why then didst thou not hearken to the voice of the Lord: but
hast turned to the prey, and hast done evil in the eyes of the Lord?
And Saul said to Samuel: Yea, I have hearkened to the voice of
the Lord, and have walked in the way by which the Lord sent me, and have
brought Agag, the king of Amalec, and Amalec I have slain.
But the people took of the spoils, sheep and oxen, as the
firstfruits of those things that were slain, to offer sacrifice to the
And Samuel said: Doth the Lord desire holocausts and victims, and
not rather that the voice of the Lord should be obeyed? For obedience is
better than sacrifices: and to hearken rather than to offer the fat or
rams.
Because it is like the sin of witchcraft, to rebel: and like the
crime of idolatry, to refuse to obey. Forasmuch, therefore, as thou hast
rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord hath also rejected thee from
being king.
And Saul said to Samuel: I have sinned, because I have
transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and thy words, fearing the
people, and obeying their voice.
But now bear, I beseech thee, my sin, and return with me, that I
may adore the Lord.
And Samuel said to Saul: I will not return with thee, because
thou hath rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee
from being king over Israel.
And Samuel turned about to go away: but he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent.
And Samuel said to him: The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel
from thee this day, and hath given it to thy neighbour who is better
than thee.
But the triumpher in Israel will not spare, and will not be moved
to repentance: for he is not a man that he should repent.
Then he said: I have sinned: yet honour me now before the
ancients of my people, and before Israel, and return with me, that I may
adore the Lord thy God.
So Samuel turned again after Saul: and Saul adored the Lord.
And Samuel said: Bring hither to me Agag, the king of Amalec. And
bitter death separate in this manner?
And Samuel said: As thy sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed him in
pieces before the Lord in Galgal.
And Samuel departed to Ramatha: but Saul went up to his house in
And Samuel saw Saul no more till the day of his death:
nevertheless, Samuel mourned for Saul, because the Lord repented that he
had made him king over Israel.
to see him: he visited him no more.
And the Lord said to Samuel: How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
whom I have rejected from reigning over Israel? fill thy horn with oil,
and come, that I may send thee to Isai, the Bethlehemite: for I have
provided me a king among his sons.
And Samuel said: How shall I go? for Saul will hear of it, and he
will kill me. And the Lord said: Thou shalt take with thee a calf of the
herd, and thou shalt say: I am come to sacrifice to the Lord.
And thou shalt call Isai to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee
what thou art to do, and thou shalt anoint him whom I shall shew to
thee.
Then Samuel did as the Lord had said to him. And he came to
said: Is thy coming hither peaceable?
And he said: It is peaceable: I am come to offer sacrifice to the
sanctified Isai and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.
And when they were come in, he saw Eliab, and said: Is the Lord's
anointed before him?
And the Lord said to Samuel: Look not on his countenance, nor on
the height of his stature: because I have rejected him, nor do I judge
according to the look of man: for man seeth those things that appear,
but the Lord beholdeth the heart.
And Isai called Abinadab, and brought him before Samuel. And he
said: Neither hath the Lord chosen this,
And Isai brought Samma, and he said of him: Neither hath the Lord
chosen this.
Isai therefore brought his seven sons before Samuel: and Samuel
said to Isai: The Lord hath not chosen any one of these.
And Samuel said to Isai: Are here all thy sons? He answered:
to Isai: Send, and fetch him: for we will not sit down till he come
hither.
He sent therefore and brought him. Now he was ruddy and beautiful
to behold, and of a comely face. And the Lord said: Arise, and anoint
him, for this is he.
Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that
day forward: and Samuel rose up, and went to Ramatha.
But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit
from the Lord troubled him.
punishment, either possessed or obsessed him.
And the servants of Saul said to him: Behold now an evil spirit
from God troubleth thee.
Let our lord give orders, and thy servants who are before thee,
will seek out a man skilful in playing on the harp, that when the evil
spirit from the Lord is upon thee, he may play with his hand, and thou
mayst bear it more easily.
And Saul said to his servants: Provide me then some man that can
play well, and bring him to me.
And one of the servants answering, said: Behold I have seen a son
of Isai, the Bethlehemite, a skilful player, and one of great strength,
and a man fit for war, and prudent in his words, and a comely person:
and the Lord is with him.
Then Saul sent messengers to Isai, saying: Send me David, thy
son, who is in the pastures.
And Isai took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and
a kid of the flock, and sent them by the hand of David, his son, to
And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
exceedingly, and made him his armourbearer.
And Saul sent to Isai, saying: Let David stand before me: for he
hath found favour in my sight.
So whensoever the evil spirit from the Lord was upon Saul, David
took his harp, and played with his hand, and Saul was refreshed, and was
better, for the evil spirit departed from him.
Now the Philistines gathering together their troops to battle,
assembled at Socho of Juda: and camped between Socho and Azeca, in the
borders of Dommim.
And Saul and the children of Israel being gathered together, came
to the valley of Terebinth, and they set the army in array to fight
against the Philistines.
And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
between them.
And there went out a man baseborn from the camp of the
span:
And he had a helmet of brass upon his head, and he was clothed
with a coat of mail with scales, and the weight of his coat of mail was
five thousand sicles of brass:
And he had greaves of brass on his legs, and a buckler of brass
covered his shoulders.
And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam, and the head
of his spear weighed six hundred sicles of iron: and his armourbearer
went before him.
And standing, he cried out to the bands of Israel, and said to
them: Why are you come out prepared to fight? am not I a Philistine, and
you the servants of Saul? Choose out a man of you, and let him come down
and fight hand to hand.
If he be able to fight with me, and kill me, we will be servants
to you: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, you shall be
servants, and shall serve us.
And the Philistine said: I have defied the bands of Israel this
day: give me a man, and let him fight with me hand to hand.
And Saul and all the Israelites hearing these words of the
Now David was the son of that Ephrathite, of Bethlehem Juda,
before mentioned, whose name was Isai, who had eight sons, and was an
old man in the days of Saul, and of great age among men.
And his three eldest sons followed Saul to the battle: and the
names of his three sons that went to the battle, were Eliab, the
firstborn, and the second, Abinadab, and the third Samma:
But David was the youngest. So the three eldest having followed
David went, and returned from Saul, to feed his father's flock at
Now the Philistine came out morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days.
And Isai said to David, his son: Take for thy brethren an ephi of
frumenty, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren,
And carry these ten little cheeses to the tribune: and go see thy
brethren, if they are well: and learn with whom they are placed.
But Saul, and they, and all the children of Israel, were in the
valley of Terebinth, fighting against the Philistines.
David, therefore, arose in the morning, and gave the charge of
the flock to the keeper: and went away loaded, as Isai had commanded
him. And he came to the place of Magala, and to the army, which was
going out to fight, and shouted for the battle.
For Israel had put themselves in array, and the Philistines who
stood against them were prepared.
And David leaving the vessels which he had brought, under the
care of the keeper of the baggage, ran to the place of the battle, and
asked if all things went well with his brethren.
And as he talked with them, that baseborn man, whose name was
of the Philistines: and he spoke according to the same words, and David
heard them,
And all the Israelites, when they saw the man, fled from his
face, fearing him exceedingly.
And some one of Israel said: Have you seen this man that is come
up, for he is come up to defy Israel. And the man that shall slay him,
the king will enrich with great riches, and will give him his daughter,
and will make his father's house free from tribute in Israel.
And David spoke to the men that stood by him, saying: What shall
be given to the man that shall kill this Philistine, and shall take away
the reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living God?
And the people answered him the same words, saying: These things
shall be given to the man that shall slay him.
Now when Eliab his eldest brother heard this, when he was
speaking with others, he was angry with David, and said: Why camest thou
hither? and why didst thou leave those few sheep in the desert? I know
thy pride, and the wickedness of thy heart: that thou art come down to
see the battle.
And David said: What have I done? is there not cause to speak?
And he turned a little aside from him to another: and said the
same word. And the people answered him as before.
And the words which David spoke were heard, and were rehearsed
before Saul.
And when he was brought to Saul, he said to him. Let not any
man's heart be dismayed in him: I thy servant will go, and will fight
against the Philistine.
And Saul said to David: Thou art not able to withstand this
a warrior from his youth.
And David said to Saul: Thy servant kept his father's sheep, and
there came a lion, or a bear, and took a ram out of the midst of the
flock:
And I pursued after them, and struck them, and delivered it out
of their mouth: and they rose up against me, and I caught them by the
throat, and I strangled, and killed them.
For I thy servant have killed both a lion and a bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be also as one of them. I will go now,
and take away the reproach of the people: for who is this uncircumcised
And David said: The Lord who delivered me out of the paw of the
lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistine. And Saul said to David: Go, and the Lord be with
thee.
And Saul clothed David with his garments, and put a helmet of
brass upon his head, and armed him with a coat of mail.
And David having girded his sword upon his armour, began to try
if he could walk in armour: for he was not accustomed to it. And David
said to Saul: I cannot go thus, for I am not used to it. And he laid
them off,
And he took his staff, which he had always in his hands: and
chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them into the
shepherd's scrip, which he had with him, and he took a sling in his
hand, and went forth against the Philistine.
And the Philistine came on, and drew nigh against David, and his
armourbearer went before him.
And when the Philistine looked, and beheld David, he despised
him. For he was a young man, ruddy, and of a comely countenance.
And the Philistine said to David: Am I a dog, that thou comest to
me with a staff? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
And he said to David: Come to me, and I will give thy flesh to
the birds of the air, and to the beasts of the earth.
And David said to the Philistine: Thou comest to me with a sword,
and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of
the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, which thou hast
defied.
This day, and the Lord will deliver thee into my hand, and I will
slay thee, and take away thy head from thee: and I will give the
carcasses of the army of the Philistines this day to the birds of the
air, and to the beasts of the earth: that all the earth may know that
there is a God in Israel.
And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with
sword and spear: for it is his battle, and he will deliver you into our
hands.
And when the Philistine arose, and was coming, and drew nigh to
meet David, David made haste, and ran to the fight to meet the
And he put his hand into his scrip, and took a stone, and cast it
with the sling, and fetching it about, struck the Philistine in the
forehead, and he fell on his face upon the earth.
And David prevailed over the Philistine, with a sling and a
stone, and he struck, and slew the Philistine. And as David had no sword
in his hand,
He ran, and stood over the Philistine, and took his sword, and
drew it out of the sheath, and slew him, and cut off his head. And the
And the men of Israel and Juda rising up shouted, and pursued
after the Philistines till they came to the valley and to the gates of
And the children of Israel returning, after they had pursued the
And David taking the head of the Philistine, brought it to
Now at the time that Saul saw David going out against the
is this young man descended, Abner? And Abner said: As thy soul liveth,
And the king said: Inquire thou, whose son this young man is.
And when David was returned, after the Philistine was slain,
And Saul said to him: Young man, of what family art thou? And
upon David's life. He marrieth him to his daughter Michol.
And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking to Saul,
the son of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved
him as his own soul.
And Saul took him that day, and would not let him return to his
father's house.
And David and Jonathan made a covenant, for he loved him as his
own soul.
And Jonathan stripped himself of the coat with which he was
clothed, and gave it to David, and the rest of his garments, even to his
sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.
And David went out to whatsoever business Saul sent him, and he
behaved himself prudently: and Saul set him over the soldiers, and he
was acceptable in the eyes of all the people, and especially in the eyes
of Saul's servants.
Now when David returned, after he slew the Philistine, the women
came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king
And the women sung as they played, and they said: Saul slew his
thousands, and David his ten thousands.
And Saul was exceeding angry, and this word was displeasing in his
eyes, and he said: They have given David ten thousands, and to me they
have given but a thousand, what can he have more but the kingdom?
And Saul did not look on David with a good eye from that day and
forward.
And the day after, the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and
he prophesied in the midst of his house. And David played with his hand
as at other times. And Saul held a spear in his hand,
And threw it, thinking to nail David to the wall: and David stept
aside out of his presence twice.
And Saul feared David, because the Lord was with him, and was
departed from Saul himself.
Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him a captain over
a thousand men, and he went out and came in before the people.
And David behaved wisely in all his ways, and the Lord was with
him.
And Saul saw that he was exceeding prudent, and began to beware
of him.
But all Israel and Juda loved David, for he came in and went out
before them.
And Saul said to David: Behold my elder daughter Merob, her will
the hands of the Philistines be upon him.
And David said to Saul: Who am I, or what is my life, or my
father's family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law of the king?
And it came to pass at the time when Merob, the daughter of Saul,
should have been given to David, that she was given to Hadriel, the
But Michol, the other daughter of Saul, loved David. And it was
told Saul, and it pleased him.
And Saul said: I will give her to him, that she may be a
stumblingblock to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be upon
him. And Saul said to David: In two things thou shalt be my son-in-law
this day.
And Saul commanded his servants to speak to David privately,
saying: Behold, thou pleasest the king, and all his servants love thee.
And the servants of Saul spoke all these words in the ear of
king's son-in-law? But I am a poor man, and of small ability.
And the servants of Saul told him, saying: Such words as these
hath David spoken.
And Saul said: Speak thus to David: The king desireth not any
dowry, but only a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of
the king's enemies. Now Saul thought to deliver David into the hands of
the Philistines.
And when his servants had told David the words that Saul had
said, the word was pleasing in the eyes of David to be the king's son-in-
law.
And after a few days David rose up, and went with the men that
were under him, and he slew of the Philistines two hundred men, and
brought their foreskins and numbered them out to the king, that he might
be his son-in-law. Saul therefore gave him Michol, his daughter, to
wife.
And Saul saw, and understood that the Lord was with David. And
And Saul began to fear David more: and Saul became David's enemy
continually.
And the princes of the Philistines went forth: and from the
beginning of their going forth, David behaved himself more wisely than
all the servants of Saul, and his name became very famous.
messengers, and Saul himself prophesy.
And Saul spoke to Jonathan, his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill David. But Jonathan, the son of Saul, loved David
exceedingly.
And Jonathan told David, saying: Saul, my father, seeketh to kill
thee: wherefore look to thyself, I beseech thee, in the morning and thou
shalt abide in a secret place, and shalt be hid.
And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where
thou art: and I will speak of thee to my father, and whatsoever I shall
see, I will tell thee.
And Jonathan spoke good things of David to Saul, his father: and
said to him: Sin not, O king, against thy servant, David, because he
hath not sinned against thee, and his works are very good towards thee.
And he put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the
rejoice. Why therefore wilt thou sin against innocent blood, by killing
And when Saul heard this, he was appeased with the words of
Then Jonathan called David, and told him all these words: and
yesterday and the day before.
And the war began again, and David went out, and fought against
the Philistines, and defeated them with a great slaughter, and they fled
from his face.
And the evil spirit from the Lord came upon Saul; and he sat in
his house, and held a spear in his hand: and David played with his hand.
And Saul endeavoured to nail David to the wall with his spear.
him, and was fastened in the wall, and David fled, and escaped that
night.
Saul therefore sent his guards to David's house to watch him,
that he might be killed in the morning. And when Michol, David's wife,
had told him this, saying: Unless thou save thyself this night, to
morrow thou wilt die:
She let him down through a window. And he went and fled away, and
escaped.
And Michol took an image, and laid it on the bed, and put a
goat's skin, with the hair at the head of it, and covered it with
clothes.
And Saul sent officers to seize David; and it was answered that
he was sick.
And again Saul sent to see David, saying: Bring him to me in the
bed, that he may be slain.
And when the messengers were come in, they found an image upon
the bed, and a goat skin at his head.
And Saul said to Michol: Why hast thou deceived me so, and let my
enemy go and flee away? And Michol answered Saul: Because he said to me:
But David fled and escaped, and came to Samuel in Ramatha, and
told him all that Saul had done to him: and he and Samuel went and dwelt
in Najoth.
And it was told Saul by some, saying: Behold David is in Najoth,
in Ramatha.
So Saul sent officers to take David: and when they saw a company
of prophets prophesying, and Samuel presiding over them, the Spirit of
the Lord came also upon them, and they likewise began to prophesy.
was pleased on this occasion that both Samuel's messengers and himself
should experience the like impulse, that he might understand, by this
instance of the divine power, how vain are the designs of man against
him whom God protects.
And when this was told Saul, he sent other messengers: but they
also prophesied. And again Saul sent messengers the third time: and they
prophesied also. And Saul being exceeding angry,
Went also himself to Ramatha, and came as far as the great
cistern, which is in Socho, and he asked, and said: In what place are
And he went to Najoth, in Ramatha, and the Spirit of the Lord
came upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied till he came to
And he stripped himself also of his garments, and prophesied with
the rest before Samuel, and lay down naked all that day and night. This
gave occasion to a proverb: What! is Saul too among the prophets?
But David fled from Najoth, which is in Ramatha, and came and said
to Jonathan: What have I done? what is my iniquity, and what is my sin
against thy father, that he seeketh my life?
And he said to him: God forbid, thou shalt not die: for my father
will do nothing, great or little, without first telling me: hath then my
father hid this word only from me? no, this shall not be.
And he swore again to David. And David said: Thy father certainly
knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, and he will say: Let not
and thy soul liveth, there is but one step (as I may say) between me and
death.
And Jonathan said to David: Whatsoever thy soul shall say to me, I
will do for thee.
And David said to Jonathan: Behold to morrow is the new moon, and
then that I may be hid in the field till the evening of the third day.
kept according to the law, as a festival; and therefore Saul feasted on
that day: and expected the attendance of his family.
If thy father look and inquire for me, thou shalt answer him:
there are solemn sacrifices there for all of his tribe.
If he shall say: It is well: thy servant shall have peace: but if
he be angry, know that his malice is come to its height.
Deal mercifully then with thy servant: for thou hast brought me,
thy servant, into a covenant of the Lord with thee. But if there be any
iniquity in me, do thou kill me, and bring me not in to thy father.
And Jonathan said: Far be this from thee: for if I should
certainly know that evil is determined by my father against thee, I
could do no otherwise than tell thee.
And David answered Jonathan: Who shall bring me word, if thy
father should answer thee harshly concerning me?
And Jonathan said to David: Come, and let us go out into the
field. And when they were both of them gone out into the field,
Jonathan said to David: O Lord God of Israel, if I shall discover
my father's mind, to morrow, or the day after, and there be any thing
good for David, and I send not immediately to thee, and make it known to
thee,
May the Lord do so and so to Jonathan, and add still more. But if
my father shall continue in malice against thee, I will discover it to
thy ear, and will send thee away, that thou mayst go in peace, and the
And if I live, thou shalt shew me the kindness of the Lord: but
if I die,
Thou shalt not take away thy kindness from my house for ever,
when the Lord shall have rooted out the enemies of David, every one of
them from the earth, may he take away Jonathan from his house, and may
the Lord require it at the hands of David's enemies.
should not be faithful to his promise.-Ibid. Require it, etc... That is,
revenge it upon David's enemies, and upon me, if I should fail of my
word given to him.
Jonathan therefore made a covenant with the house of David: and
the Lord required it at the hands of David's enemies.
And Jonathan swore again to David, because he loved him: for he
loved him as his own soul.
And Jonathan said to him: To morrow is the new moon, and thou
wilt be missed:
For thy seat will be empty till after to morrow. So thou shalt go
down quickly, and come to the place where thou must he hid, on the day
when it is lawful to work, and thou shalt remain beside the stone, which
is called Ezel.
And I will shoot three arrows near it, and will shoot as if I
were exercising myself at a mark.
And I will send a boy, saying to him: Go and fetch me the arrows.
If I shall say to the boy: Behold the arrows are on this side of
thee, take them up: come thou to me, because there is peace to thee, and
there is no evil, as the Lord liveth. But if I shall speak thus to the
boy: Behold the arrows are beyond thee: go in peace, for the Lord hath
sent thee away.
And concerning the word which I and thou have spoken, the Lord be
between thee and me forever.
So David was hid in the field, and the new moon came, and the
king sat down to eat bread.
And when the king sat down upon his chair, (according to custom)
which was beside the wall, Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side,
and David's place appeared empty.
And Saul said nothing that day, for he thought it might have
happened to him, that he was not clean, nor purified.
And when the second day after the new moon was come, David's
place appeared empty again. And Saul said to Jonathan, his son: Why
cometh not the son of Isai to meat neither yesterday, nor to day?
And Jonathan answered Saul: He asked leave of me earnestly to go
to Bethlehem.
And he said: Let me go, for there is a solemn sacrifice in the
city, one of my brethren hath sent for me: and now if I have found
favour in thy eyes, I will go quickly, and see my brethren. For this
cause he came not to the king's table.
Then Saul being angry against Jonathan, said to him: Thou son of
a woman that is the ravisher of a man, do I not know that thou lovest
the son of Isai to thy own confusion, and to the confusion of thy
shameless mother?
For as long as the son of Isai liveth upon earth, thou shalt not
be established, nor thy kingdom. Therefore now presently send, and fetch
him to me: for he is the son of death.
be put to death.
And Jonathan answering Saul, his father, said: Why shall he die?
And Saul caught up a spear to strike him. And Jonathan understood
that it was determined by his father to kill David.
So Jonathan rose from the table in great anger, and did not eat
bread on the second day after the new moon. For he was grieved for
And when the morning came, Jonathan went into the field according
to the appointment with David, and a little boy with him.
And he said to his boy: Go, and fetch me the arrows which I
shoot. And when the boy ran, he shot another arrow beyond the boy.
The boy therefore came to the place of the arrow which Jonathan
had shot: and Jonathan cried after the boy, and said: Behold the arrow
is there further beyond thee.
And Jonathan cried again after the boy, saying: Make haste
speedily, stand not. And Jonathan's boy gathered up the arrows, and
brought them to his master:
And he knew not at all what was doing: for only Jonathan and
Jonathan therefore gave his arms to the boy, and said to him: Go,
and carry them into the city.
And when the boy was gone, David rose out of his place, which was
toward the south, and falling on his face to the ground, adored thrice:
and kissing one another, they wept together; but David more.
And Jonathan said to David: Go in peace: and let all stand that
we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord, saying: The Lord be
between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever.
And David arose, and departed: and Jonathan went into the city.
himself mad before Achis, king of Geth.
And David came to Nobe, to Achimelech, the priest and Achimelech
was astonished at David's coming. And he said to him: Why art thou
alone, and no man with thee?
And David said to Achimelech, the priest: The king hath commanded
me a business, and said: Let no man know the thing for which thou art
sent by me, and what manner of commands I have given thee: and I have
appointed my servants to such and such a place.
Now therefore if thou have any thing at hand, though it were but
five loaves, give me, or whatsoever thou canst find.
And the priest answered David, saying: I have no common bread at
hand, but only holy bread, if the young men be clean, especially from
women?
that were to eat that bread, which was a figure of the bread of life
which we receive in the blessed sacrament; how clean ought Christians to
be when they approach to our tremendous mysteries. And what reason hath
the church of God to admit none to be her ministers to consecrate and
daily receive this most pure sacrament, but such as devote themselves to
a life of perpetual purity.
And David answered the priest, and said to him: Truly, as to what
concerneth women, we have refrained ourselves from yesterday and the day
before, when we came out, and the vessels of the young men were holy.
vessels.
kept from impurity.-Ibid. Is defiled... Is liable to expose us to
dangers of uncleanness.-Ibid. Be sanctified, etc... That is, we shall
take care, notwithstanding these dangerous circumstances, to keep our
vessels holy, that is, to keep our bodies from every thing that may
defile us.
The priest therefore gave him hallowed bread: for there was no
bread there, but only the loaves of proposition, which had been taken
away from before the face of the Lord, that hot loaves might be set up.
Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day,
within the tabernacle of the Lord: and his name was Doeg, an Edomite,
the chiefest of Saul's herdsmen.
And David said to Achimelech: Hast thou here at hand a spear, or a
sword? for I brought not my own sword, nor my own weapons with me, for
the king's business required haste.
And the priest said: Lo, here is the sword of Goliath, the
a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take this, take it, for here
there is no other but this. And David said: There is none like that,
give it me.
And David arose and fled that day from the face of Saul: and came
to Achis, the king of Geth:
And the servants of Achis, when they saw David, said to him: Is
not this David, the king of the land? Did they not sing to him in their
dances, saying: Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands?
But David laid up these words in his heart, and was exceedingly
afraid at the face of Achis, the king of Geth.
And he changed his countenance before them, and slipt down
between their hands: and he stumbled against the doors of the gate, and
his spittle ran down upon his beard.
And Achis said to his servants: You saw the man was mad: why have
you brought him to me?
Have we need of mad men, that you have brought in this fellow, to
play the madman in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house?
and all the other priests of Nobe to be slain. Abiathar escapeth.
David therefore went from thence, and fled to the cave of Odollam.
went down to him thither.
And all that were in distress, and oppressed with debt, and under
affliction of mind, gathered themselves unto him: and he became their
prince, and there were with him about four hundred men.
And David departed from thence into Maspha of Moab: and he said to
the king of Moab: Let my father and my mother tarry with you, I beseech
thee, till I know what God will do for me.
And he left them under the eyes of the king of Moab, and they
abode with him all the days that David was in the hold.
And Gad the prophet said to David: Abide not in the hold, depart,
and go into the land of Juda. And David departed, and came into the
forest of Haret.
And Saul heard that David was seen, and the men that were with
him. Now whilst Saul abode in Gabaa, and was in the wood, which is by
about him,
He said to his servants that stood about him: Hear me now, ye sons
of Jemini: will the son of Isai give every one of you fields, and
vineyards, and make you all tribunes, and centurions:
That all of you have conspired against me, and there is no one to
inform me, especially when even my son hath entered into league with the
son of Isai? There is not one of you that pitieth my case, nor that
giveth me any information: because my son hath raised up my servant
against me, plotting against me to this day.
And Doeg, the Edomite, who stood by, and was the chief among the
servants of Saul, answering, said: I saw the son of Isai, in Nobe, with
And he consulted the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and
gave him the sword of Goliath, the Philistine.
Then the king sent to call for Achimelech, the priest, the son of
they came all of them to the king.
And Saul said to Achimelech: Hear, thou son of Achitob. He
answered: Here I am, my lord.
And Saul said to him: Why have you conspired against me, thou,
and the son of Isai, and thou hast given him bread and a sword, and hast
consulted the Lord for him, that he should rise up against me,
continuing a traitor to this day.
And Achimelech answering the king, said: And who amongst all thy
servants is so faithful as David, who is the king's son-in-law, and
goeth forth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thy house?
Did I begin to day to consult the Lord for him? far be this from
me: let not the king suspect such a thing against his servant, or any
one in all my father's house: for thy servant knew nothing of this
matter, either little or great.
And the king said: Dying thou shalt die, Achimelech, thou and all
thy father's house.
And the king said to the messengers that stood about him: Turn,
and kill the priests of the Lord, for their hand is with David, because
they knew that he was fled, and they told it not to me. And the
king's servants would not put forth their hands against the priests of
the Lord.
And the king said to Doeg: Turn thou, and fall upon the priests.
that day eighty-five men that wore the linen ephod.
And Nobe, the city of the priests, he smote with the edge of the
sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and ox, and ass, and
sheep, with the edge of the sword.
But one of the sons of Achimelech, the son of Achitob, whose name
was Abiathar, escaped, and fled to David,
And told him that Saul had slain the priests of the Lord.
And David said to Abiathar: I knew that day when Doeg, the
the occasion of the death of all the souls of thy father's house.
Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life,
seeketh thy life also, and with me thou shalt be saved.
desert of Ziph. Jonathan and he confirm their former covenant. The
away by an invasion from the Philistines.
And they told David, saying: Behold the Philistines fight against
Therefore David consulted the Lord, saying: Shall I go and smite
these Philistines? And the Lord said to David: Go, and thou shalt smite
the Philistines, and shalt save Ceila.
And the men that were with David, said to him: Behold we are in
fear here in Judea, how much more if we go to Ceila against the bands of
the Philistines?
Therefore David consulted the Lord again. And he answered and said
to him: Arise, and go to Ceila: for I will deliver the Philistines into
thy hand.
David, therefore, and his men, went to Ceila, and fought against
the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and made a great
slaughter of them: and David saved the inhabitants of Ceila.
Now at that time, when Abiathar, the son of Achimelech, fled to
the urim and thummim, by which the Lord gave his oracle.
And it was told Saul that David was come to Ceila: and Saul said:
into a city that hath gates and bars.
And Saul commanded all the people to go down to fight against
Now when David understood that Saul secretly prepared evil against
him, he said to Abiathar, the priest: Bring hither the ephod.
And David said: O Lord God of Israel, thy servant hath heard a
report, that Saul designeth to come to Ceila, to destroy the city for my
sake:
Will the men of Ceila deliver me into his hands? and will Saul
come down, as thy servant hath heard? O Lord God of Israel, tell thy
servant. And the Lord said: He will come down.
And David said: Will the men of Ceila deliver me and my men into
the hands of Saul? And the Lord said: They will deliver thee up.
Then David and his men, who were about six hundred, arose, and
departing from Ceila, wandered up and down, uncertain where they should
stay: and it was told Saul that David was fled from Ceila, and had
escaped: wherefore he forbore to go out.
But David abode in the desert in strong holds, and he remained in
a mountain of the desert of Ziph, in a woody hill. And Saul sought him
always: but the Lord delivered him not into his hands.
And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life. And David
was in the desert of Ziph, in a wood.
And Jonathan, the son of Saul, arose, and went to David, into the
wood, and strengthened his hands in God: and he said to him:
Fear not: for the hand of my father, Saul, shall not find thee,
and thou shalt reign over Israel, and I shall be next to thee; yea and
my father knoweth this.
And they two made a covenant before the Lord: and David abode in
the wood: but Jonathan returned to his house.
And the Ziphites went up to Saul, in Gabaa, saying: Lo, doth not
which is on the right hand of the desert.
Now therefore come down, as thy soul hath desired to come down:
and it shall be our business to deliver him into the king's hands.
And Saul said: Blessed be ye of the Lord, for you have pitied my
case.
Go, therefore, I pray you, and use all diligence, and curiously
inquire, and consider the place where his foot is, and who hath seen him
there: for he thinketh of me, that I lie craftily in wait for him.
Consider, and see all his lurking holes, wherein he is hid, and
return to me with the certainty of the thing, that I may go with you.
search him out in all the thousands of Juda.
And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: and David and his
men were in the desert of Maon, in the plain at the right hand of
Then Saul and his men went to seek him: and it was told David,
and forthwith he went down to the rock, and abode in the wilderness of
wilderness of Maon.
And Saul went on this side of the mountain: and David and his men
were on the other side of the mountain: and David despaired of being
able to escape from the face of Saul: and Saul and his men encompassed
And a messenger came to Saul, saying: Make haste to come, for the
Wherefore Saul returned, leaving the pursuit of David, and went
to meet the Philistines. For this cause they called that place the rock
of division.
where David hath him in his power.
Then David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds of
And when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, they
told him, saying: Behold, David is in the desert of Engaddi.
Saul, therefore, took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel,
and went out to seek after David and his men, even upon the most craggy
rocks, which are accessible only to wild goats.
And he came to the sheepcotes which were in his way. And there was
a cave, into which Saul went, to ease nature: now David and his men lay
hid in the inner part of the cave.
And the servants of David said to him: Behold the day, of which
the Lord said to thee: I will deliver thy enemy unto thee, that thou
mayst do to him as it shall seem good in thy eyes. Then David arose, and
secretly cut off the hem of Saul's robe.
After which David's heart struck him, because he had cut off the
hem of Saul's robe.
And he said to his men: The Lord be merciful unto me, that I may
do no such thing to my master, the Lord's anointed, as to lay my hand
upon him, because he is the Lord's anointed.
And David stopped his men with his words, and suffered them not to
rise against Saul: but Saul, rising up out of the cave, went on his way.
And David also rose up after him: and going out of the cave, cried
after Saul, saying: My lord the king. And Saul looked behind him: and
And said to Saul: Why dost thou hear the words of men that say:
Behold this day thy eyes have seen, that the Lord hath delivered
thee into my hand, in the cave, and I had a thought to kill thee, but my
eye hath spared thee. For I said: I will not put out my hand against my
lord, because he is the Lord's anointed.
consent.
Moreover, see and know, O my father, the hem of thy robe in my
hand, that when I cut off the hem of thy robe, I would not put out my
hand against thee. Reflect, and see, that there is no evil in my hand,
nor iniquity, neither have I sinned against thee: but thou liest in wait
for my life, to take it away.
The Lord judge between me and thee and the Lord revenge me of
thee: but my hand shall not be upon thee.
meaning is, that he refers his whole cause to God, to judge and punish
according to his justice: yet so as to keep himself in the mean time,
from all personal hatred to Saul, or desire of gratifying his own
passion, by seeking revenge. So far from it, that when Saul was
afterwards slain, we find, that instead of rejoicing at his death, he
mourned most bitterly for him.
As also it is said in the old proverb: From the wicked shall
wickedness come forth: therefore my hand shall not be upon thee. After
whom dost thou come out, O king of Israel?
After whom dost thou pursue? After a dead dog, after a flea.
Be the Lord judge, and judge between me and thee, and see, and
judge my cause, and deliver me out of thy hand.
And when David had made an end of speaking these words to Saul,
voice, and wept:
And he said to David: Thou art more just than I: for thou hast
done good to me, and I have rewarded thee with evil.
And thou hast shewed this day what good things thou hast done to
me: how the Lord delivered me into thy hand, and thou hast not killed
me.
For who when he hath found his enemy, will let him go well away?
me this day.
And now as I know that thou shalt surely be king, and have the
kingdom of Israel in thy hand:
Swear to me by the Lord, that thou wilt not destroy my seed after
me, nor take away my name from the house of my father.
And David swore to Saul. So Saul went home: and David and his men
went up into safer places.
him: but is appeased by Abigail.
And Samuel died, and all Israel was gathered together, and they
mourned for him, and buried him in his house in Ramatha. And David rose,
and went down into the wilderness of Pharan.
Now there was a certain man in the wilderness of Maon, and his
possessions were in Carmel, and the man was very great: and he had three
thousand sheep, and a thousand goats: and it happened that he was
shearing his sheep in Carmel.
Now the name of the man was Nabal: and the name of his wife was
was churlish, and very bad and ill natured: and he was of the house of
And when David heard in the wilderness, that Nabal was shearing
his sheep,
He sent ten young men, and said to them: Go up to Carmel, and go
to Nabal, and salute him in my name with peace.
And you shall say: Peace be to my brethren, and to thee, and peace
to thy house, and peace to all that thou hast.
I have heard that thy shepherds that were with us in the desert
were shearing: we never molested them, neither was there ought missing
to them of the flock at any time, all the while they were with us in
Ask thy servants, and they will tell thee. Now therefore let thy
servants find favour in thy eyes: for we are come in a good day,
whatsoever thy hand shall find give to thy servants, and to thy son
And when David's servants came, they spoke to Nabal all these
words in David's name, and then held their peace.
But Nabal answering the servants of David, said: Who is David?
and what is the son of Isai? servants are multiplied now days who flee
from their masters.
Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and the flesh of my
cattle, which I have killed for my shearers, and give to men whom I know
not whence they are?
So the servants of David went back their way, and returning came
and told him all the words that he said.
Then David said to his young men: Let every man gird on his
sword. And they girded on every man his sword. And David also girded on
his sword: and there followed David about four hundred men, and two
hundred remained with the baggage.
But one of the servants told, Abigail, the wife of Nabal, saying:
master: and he rejected them.
These men were very good to us, and gave us no trouble: Neither
did we ever lose any thing all the time that we conversed with them in
the desert.
They were a wall unto us, both by night and day, all the while we
were with them keeping the sheep.
Wherefore consider, and think what thou hast to do: for evil is
determined against thy husband, and against thy house, and he is a son
of Belial, so that no man can speak to him.
Then Abigail made haste and took two hundred loaves, and two
vessels of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
parched corn, and a hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes
of dry figs, and laid them upon asses:
And she said to her servants: Go before me: behold, I will follow
after you: but she told not her husband, Nabal.
And when she had gotten upon an ass, and was coming down to the
foot of the mountain, David and his men came down over against her, and
she met them.
And David said: Truly in vain have I kept all that belonged to
this fellow in the wilderness, and nothing was lost of all that
pertained unto him: and he hath returned me evil for good.
May God do so and so, and add more to the foes of David, if I
leave of all that belong to him till the morning, any that pisseth
against the wall.
and his family, as he himself was afterwards sensible, when he blessed
And when Abigail saw David, she made haste and lighted off the
ass, and fell before David, on her face, and adored upon the ground.
And she fell at his feet, and said: Upon me let this iniquity be,
my lord: let thy handmaid speak, I beseech thee, in thy ears, and hear
the words of thy servant.
Let not my lord the king, I pray thee, regard this naughty man,
but I, thy handmaid, did not see thy servants, my lord, whom thou
sentest.
Now therefore, my lord, the Lord liveth, and thy soul liveth, who
hath withholden thee from coming to blood, and hath saved thy hand to
thee: and now let thy enemies be as Nabal, and all they that seek evil
to my lord.
Wherefore receive this blessing, which thy handmaid hath brought
to thee, my lord: and give it to the young men that follow thee, my
lord.
Forgive the iniquity of thy handmaid: for the Lord will surely
make for my lord a faithful house, because thou, my lord, fightest the
battles of the Lord: let not evil therefore be found in thee all the
days of thy life.
For if a man at any time shall rise, and persecute thee, and seek
thy life, the soul of my lord shall be kept, as in the bundle of the
living, with the Lord thy God: but the souls of thy enemies shall be
whirled, as with the violence and whirling of a sling.
And when the Lord shall have done to thee, my lord, all the good
that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have made thee prince
over Israel,
This shall not be an occasion of grief to thee, and a scruple of
heart to my lord, that thou hast shed innocent blood, or hast revenged
thyself: and when the Lord shall have done well by my lord, thou shalt
remember thy handmaid.
And David said to Abigail: Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel,
who sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy speech:
And blessed be thou, who hast kept me to day from coming to
blood, and revenging me with my own hand.
Otherwise, as the Lord liveth, the God of Israel, who hath
withholden me from doing thee any evil, if thou hadst not quickly come
to meet me, there had not been left to Nabal by the morning light, any
that pisseth against the wall.
And David received at her hand all that she had brought him, and
said to her: Go in peace into thy house, behold I have heard thy voice,
and honoured thy face.
And Abigail came to Nabal: and behold he had a feast in his
house, like the feast of a king: and Nabal's heart was merry, for he was
very drunk: and she told him nothing less or more until morning.
But early in the morning, when Nabal had digested his wine, his
wife told him these words, and his heart died within him, and he became
as a stone.
And after ten days had passed, the Lord struck Nabal, and he
died.
And when David had heard that Nabal was dead, he said: Blessed be
the Lord, who hath judged the cause of my reproach, at the hand of
the wickedness of Nabal upon his head. Then David sent and treated with
for the death of Nabal (which would have argued a rancour of heart), but
because he saw that God had so visibly taken his cause in hand, in
punishing the injury done to him; whilst, by a merciful providence he
kept him from revenging himself.
And David's servants came to Abigail, to Carmel, and spoke to
her, saying: David hath sent us to thee, to take thee to himself for a
wife.
And she arose, and bowed herself down with her face to the earth,
and said: Behold, let thy servant be a handmaid, to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord.
And Abigail arose, and made haste, and got upon an ass, and five
damsels went with her, her waiting maids, and she followed the
messengers of David, and became his wife.
Moreover David took also Achinoam of Jezrahel: and they were both
of them his wives.
But Saul gave Michol, his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti, the
son of Lais, who was of Gallim.
men are asleep, but suffereth him not to be touched. Saul again
confesseth his fault, and promiseth peace.
And the men of Ziph came to Saul in Gabaa, saying: Behold David is
hid in the hill of Hachila, which is over against the wilderness.
And Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph having
with him three thousand chosen men of Israel, to seek David in the
wilderness of Ziph.
And Saul encamped in Gabaa Hachila, which was over against the
wilderness in the way: and David abode in the wilderness. And seeing
that Saul was come after him into the wilderness,
He sent spies, and learned that he was most certainly come
thither.
And David arose secretly, and came to the place where Saul was:
and when he had beheld the place, wherein Saul slept, and Abner, the son
of Ner, the captain of his army, and Saul sleeping in a tent, and the
rest of the multitude round about him,
David spoke to Achimelech, the Hethite, and Abisai, the son of
into the camp? And Abisai said: I will go with thee.
So David and Abisai came to the people by night, and found Saul
lying and sleeping in the tent, and his spear fixed in the ground at his
head: and Abner and the people sleeping round about him.
And Abisai said to David: God hath shut up thy enemy this day into
thy hands: now then I will run him through with my spear, even to the
earth at once, and there shall be no need of a second time.
And David said to Abisai: Kill him not: for who shall put forth
his hand against the Lord's anointed, and shall be guiltless?
And David said: As the Lord liveth, unless the Lord shall strike
him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall go down to battle, and
perish:
The Lord be merciful unto me, and keep me that I never put forth
my hand against the Lord's anointed. But now take the spear which is at
his head, and the cup of water, and let us go.
So David took the spear, and the cup of water which was at Saul's
head, and they went away: and no man saw it, or knew it, or awaked, but
they were all asleep, for a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon
them.
And when David was gone over to the other side, and stood on the
top of the hill afar off, and a good space was between them,
David cried to the people, and to Abner, the son of Ner, saying:
that criest, and disturbest the king?
And David said to Abner: Art not thou a man? and who is like unto
thee in Israel? why then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there
came one of the people in to kill the king thy lord.
This thing is not good, that thou hast done: as the Lord liveth,
you are the sons of death, who have not kept your master, the Lord's
anointed. And now where is the king's spear, and the cup of water, which
was at his head?
And Saul knew David's voice, and said: Is this thy voice, my son
And he said: Wherefore doth my lord persecute his servant? What
have I done? or what evil is there in my hand?
Now therefore hear, I pray thee, my lord the king, the words of
thy servant: If the Lord stir thee up against me, let him accept of
sacrifice: but if the sons of men, they are cursed in the sight of the
inheritance of the Lord, saying: Go, serve strange gods.
And now let not my blood be shed upon the earth before the Lord:
for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as the partridge is
hunted in the mountains.
And Saul said: I have sinned; return, my son David, for I will no
more do thee harm, because my life hath been precious in thy eyes this
day: for it appeareth that I have done foolishly, and have been ignorant
in very many things.
And David answering, said: Behold the king's spear: let one of
the king's servants come over and fetch it.
And the Lord will reward every one according to his justice, and
his faithfulness: for the Lord hath delivered thee this day into my
hand, and I would not put forth my hand against the Lord's anointed.
And as thy life hath been much set by this day in my eyes, so let
my life be much set by in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver me
from all distress.
Then Saul said to David: Blessed art thou, my son David: and
truly doing thou shalt do, and prevailing thou shalt prevail. And David
went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.
of Siceleg.
And David said in his heart: I shall one day or other fall into
the hands of Saul: is it not better for me to flee, and to be saved in
the land of the Philistines, that Saul may despair of me, and cease to
seek me in all the coasts of Israel? I will flee then out of his hands.
And David arose, and went away, both he and the six hundred men
that were with him, to Achis, the son of Maoch, king of Geth.
And David dwelt with Achis at Geth, he and his men; every man with
his household, and David with his two wives, Achinoam, the
And it was told Saul that David was fled to Geth, and he sought no
more after him.
And David said to Achis: If I have found favour in thy sight, let
a place be given me in one of the cities of this country, that I may
dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with
thee?
Then Achis gave him Siceleg that day: for which reason Siceleg
belongeth to the kings of Juda unto this day.
And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines,
was four months.
And David and his men went up, and pillaged Gessuri, and Gerzi,
and the Amalecites: for these were of old the inhabitants of the
countries, as men go to Sur, even to the land of Egypt.
had ordered to be destroyed: which justifies David's proceedings in
their regard. Though it is to be observed here, that we are not under an
obligation of justifying every thing that he did: for the scripture, in
relating what was done, does not say that it was well done. And even
such as are true servants of God, are not to be imitated in all they do.
And David wasted all the land, and left neither man nor woman
alive: and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the
camels, and the apparel, and returned and came to Achis.
And Achis said to him: Whom hast thou gone against to day? David
answered: Against the south of Juda, and against the south of Jerameel,
and against the south of Ceni.
And David saved neither man nor woman, neither brought he any of
them to Geth, saying: Lest they should speak against us. So did David,
and such was his proceeding all the days that he dwelt in the country of
the Philistines.
And Achis believed David, saying: He hath done much harm to his
people Israel: Therefore he shall be my servant for ever.
And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered
together their armies, to be prepared for war against Israel: And Achis
said to David: Know thou now assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to the war, thou, and thy men.
And David said to Achis: Now thou shalt know what thy servant will
do. And Achis said to David: And I will appoint thee to guard my life
for ever.
Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel mourned for him, and buried
him in Ramatha, his city. And Saul had put away all the magicians and
soothsayers out of the land.
And the Philistines were gathered together, and came and encamped
in Sunam: and Saul also gathered together all Israel, and came to
And Saul saw the army of the Philistines, and was afraid, and his
heart was very much dismayed.
And he consulted the Lord, and he answered him not, neither by
dreams, nor by priests, nor by prophets.
And Saul said to his servants: Seek me a woman that hath a
divining spirit, and I will go to her, and enquire by her. And his
servants said to him: There is a woman that hath a divining spirit at
Then he disguised himself: and put on other clothes, and he went,
and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night, and he said
to her: Divine to me by thy divining spirit, and bring me up him whom I
shall tell thee.
And the woman said to him: Behold thou knowest all that Saul hath
done, and how he hath rooted out the magicians and soothsayers from the
land: why then dost thou lay a snare for my life, to cause me to be put
to death?
And Saul swore unto her by the Lord, saying: As the Lord liveth,
there shall no evil happen to thee for this thing.
And the woman said to him: Whom shall I bring up to thee? And he
said, Bring me up Samuel.
And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice,
and said to Saul: Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.
And the king said to her: Fear not: what hast thou seen? and the
woman said to Saul: I saw gods ascending out of the earth.
And he said to her: What form is he of? And she said: An old man
cometh up, and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul understood that it
was Samuel, and he bowed himself with his face to the ground, and
adored.
holy fathers, and interpreters, that the soul of Samuel appeared indeed:
and not, as some have imagined, an evil spirit in his shape. Not that
the power of her magic could bring him thither, but that God was pleased
for the punishment of Saul, that Samuel himself should denounce unto him
the evils that were falling upon him. See Eccli. 46.23.
And Samuel said to Saul: Why hast thou disturbed my rest, that I
should be brought up? And Saul said: I am in great distress: for the
hear me, neither by the hand of prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I
have called thee, that thou mayst shew me what I shall do.
And Samuel said: Why askest thou me, seeing the Lord has departed
from thee, and is gone over to thy rival?
For the Lord will do to thee as he spoke by me, and he will rend
thy kingdom out of thy hand, and will give it to thy neighbour David:
Because thou didst not obey the voice of the Lord, neither didst
thou execute the wrath of his indignation upon Amalec. Therefore hath
the Lord done to thee what thou sufferest this day.
And the Lord also will deliver Israel with thee into the hands of
the Philistines: and to morrow thou and thy sons shall be with me: and
the Lord will also deliver the army of Israel into the hands of the
though not in the same place.
And forthwith Saul fell all along on the ground; for he was
frightened with the words of Samuel, and there was no strength in him,
for he had eaten no bread all that day.
And the woman came to Saul, (for he was very much troubled) and
said to him: Behold thy handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put
my life in my hand: and I hearkened unto the words which thou spokest to
me.
Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also to the voice of thy
handmaid, and let me set before thee a morsel of bread, that thou mayst
eat and recover strength, and be able to go on thy journey.
But he refused, and said: I will not eat. But his servants and
the woman forced him, and at length hearkening to their voice, he arose
from the ground, and sat upon the bed.
Now the woman had a fatted calf in the house, and she made haste
and killed it: and taking meal, kneaded it, and baked some unleavened
bread,
And set it before Saul, and before his servants. And when they
had eaten they rose up, and walked all that night.
Now all the troops of the Philistines were gathered together to
And the lords of the Philistines marched with their hundreds and
their thousands: but David and his men were in the rear with Achis.
And the princes of the Philistines said to Achis: What mean these
know David who was the servant of Saul, the king of Israel, and hath
been with me many days, or years, and I have found no fault in him,
since the day that he fled over to me until this day?
But the prices of the Philistines were angry with him, and they
said to him: Let this man return, and abide in his place, which thou
hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest he
be an adversary to us, when we shall begin to fight: for how can he
otherwise appease his master, but with our heads?
Is not this David, to whom they sung in their dances, saying: Saul
slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
Then Achis called David, and said to him: As the Lord liveth, thou
art upright and good in my sight: and so is thy going out, and thy
coming in with me in the army: and I have not found any evil in thee,
since the day that thou camest to me unto this day: but thou pleasest
not the lords.
Return therefore, and go in peace, and offend not the eyes of the
princes of the Philistines.
And David said to Achis: But what have I done, or what hast thou
found in me thy servant, from the day that I have been in thy sight
until this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my
lord the king?
And Achis answering, said to David: I know that thou art good in
my sight, as an angel of God: But the princes of the Philistines have
said: He shall not go up with us to the battle.
Therefore arise in the morning, thou, and the servants of thy
lord, who came with thee: and when you are up before day, and it shall
begin to be light, go on your way.
So David and his men arose in the night, that they might set
forward in the morning, and returned to the land of the Philistines: and
the Philistines went up to Jezrahel.
after them, and recovereth all out of their hands.
Now when David and his men were come to Siceleg on the third day,
the Amalecites had made an invasion on the south side upon Siceleg, and
had smitten Siceleg, and burnt it with fire,
And had taken the women captives that were in it, both little and
great: and they had not killed any person, but had carried them with
them, and went on their way.
So when David and his men came to the city, and found it burnt
with fire, and that their wives, and their sons, and their daughters,
were taken captives,
David and the people that were with him, lifted up their voices,
and wept till they had no more tears.
For the two wives also of David were taken captives, Achinoam, the
And David was greatly afflicted: for the people had a mind to
stone him, for the soul of every man was bitterly grieved for his sons
and daughters: but David took courage in the Lord his God.
And he said to Abiathar, the priest, the son of Achimelech: Bring
me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought the ephod to David.
And David consulted the Lord, saying: Shall I pursue after these
robbers, and shall I overtake them, or not? And the Lord said to him:
prey.
So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and
they came to the torrent Besor: and some, being weary, stayed there.
But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred
stayed, who, being weary, could not go over the torrent Besor.
And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to
As also a piece of a cake of figs, and two bunches of raisins.
for he had not eaten bread, nor drunk water, three days and three
nights.
And David said to him: To whom dost thou belong; or whence dost
thou come? and whither art thou going? He said: I am a young man of
began to be sick three days ago.
For we made an invasion on the south side of Cerethi, and upon
And David said to him: Canst thou bring me to this company? and
he said: Swear to me by God, that thou wilt not kill me, nor deliver me
into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee to this company. And
And when he had brought him, behold they were lying spread abroad
upon all the ground, eating and drinking, and as it were keeping a
festival day, for all the prey and the spoils which they had taken out
of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Juda.
And David slew them from the evening unto the evening of the next
day, and there escaped not a man of them, but four hundred young men,
who had gotten upon camels, and fled.
So David recovered all that the Amalecites had taken, and he
rescued his two wives.
And there was nothing missing small or great, neither of their
sons or their daughters, nor of the spoils, and whatsoever they had
taken, David recovered all.
And he took all the flocks and the herds, and made them go before
him: and they said: This is the prey of David.
And David came to the two hundred men, who, being weary, had
stayed, and were not able to follow David, and he had ordered them to
abide at the torrent Besor: and they came out to meet David, and the
people that were with him. And David coming to the people, saluted them
peaceably.
Then all the wicked and unjust men, that had gone with David,
answering, said: Because they came not with us, we will not give them
any thing of the prey which we have recovered: but let every man take
his wife, and his children, and be contented with them, and go his way.
But David said: You shall not do so, my brethren, with these
things, which the Lord hath given us, who hath kept us, and hath
delivered the robbers that invaded us into our hands:
And no man shall hearken to you in this matter. But equal shall
be the portion of him that went down to battle, and of him that abode at
the baggage, and they shall divide alike.
And this hath been done from that day forward, and since was made
a statute and an ordinance, and as a law in Israel.
Then David came to Siceleg, and sent presents of the prey to the
ancients of Juda, his neighbours, saying: Receive a blessing of the prey
of the enemies of the Lord.
To them that were in Bethel, and that were in Ramoth to the
south, and to them that were in Jether.
And to them that were in Aroer, and that were in Sephamoth, and
that were in Esthamo,
And that were in Rachal, and that were in the cities of Jerameel,
and that were in the cities of Ceni,
And that were in Arama, and that were in the lake Asan, and that
were in Athach,
And that were in Hebron, and to the rest that were in those
places, in which David had abode with his men.
And the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel
fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gelboe.
And the Philistines fell upon Saul, and upon his sons, and they
slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchisua, the sons of Saul.
And the whole weight of the battle was turned upon Saul: and the
archers overtook him, and he was grievously wounded by the archers.
Then Saul said to his armourbearer: Draw thy sword, and kill me:
lest these uncircumcised come, and slay me, and mock at me. And his
armourbearer would not: for he was struck with exceeding great fear.
And when his armourbearer saw this, to wit, that Saul was dead, he
also fell upon his sword and died with him.
So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all
his men that same day together.
And the men of Israel, that were beyond the valley, and beyond the
and his sons, forsook their cities, and fled: and the Philistines came
and dwelt there.
And on the morrow the Philistines came to strip the slain, and
they found Saul and his three sons lying in mount Gelboe.
And they cut off Saul's head, and stripped him of his armour, and
sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the
temples of their idols and among their people.
And they put his armour in the temple of Astaroth, but his body
they hung on the wall of Bethsan.
Now when the inhabitants of Jabes Galaad had heard all that the
All the most valiant men arose, and walked all the night, and
took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, from the wall of
And they took their bones, and buried them in the wood of Jabes:
and fasted seven days.
of David's reign, being a history for the space of about forty-six
years.
to be slain who pretended he had killed Saul.
Now it came to pass, after Saul was dead, that David returned from
the slaughter of the Amalecites, and abode two days in Siceleg.
And on the third day, there appeared a man who came out of Saul's
camp, with his garments rent, and dust strewed on his head: and when he
came to David, he fell upon his face, and adored.
And David said to him: From whence comest thou? And he said to him:
And David said unto him: What is the matter that is come to pass?
tell me: He said: The people are fled from the battle, and many of the
people are fallen and dead: moreover Saul and Jonathan his son are
slain.
And David said to the young man that told him: How knowest thou
that Saul and Jonathan his son, are dead?
And the young man that told him, said: I came by chance upon mount
drew nigh unto him,
And looking behind him, and seeing me, he called me. And I
answered, Here am I.
And he said to me: Who art thou? And I said to him: I am an
And he said to me: Stand over me, and kill me: for anguish is come
upon me, and as yet my whole life is in me.
So standing over him, I killed him: for I knew that he could not
live after the fall: and I took the diadem that was on his head, and the
bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither to thee, my
lord.
easily be proved by comparing it with the last chapter of the foregoing
book.
Then David took hold of his garments and rent them, and likewise
all the men that were with him.
And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until evening for Saul, and
for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the house
of Israel, because they were fallen by the sword.
And David said to the young man that told him: Whence art thou? He
answered: I am the son of a stranger of Amalec.
David said to him: Why didst thou not fear to put out thy hand to
kill the Lord's anointed?
And David calling one of his servants, said: Go near and fall upon
him. And he struck him so that he died.
And David said to him: Thy blood be upon thy own head: for thy own
mouth hath spoken against thee, saying: I have slain the Lord's
anointed.
And David made this kind of lamentation over Saul, and over
(Also he commanded that they should teach the children of Juda the
use of the bow, as it is written in the book of the just.) And he said:
The illustrious of Israel are slain upon thy mountains: how are
the valiant fallen?
Tell it not in Geth, publish it not in the streets of Ascalon:
lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph.
Ye mountains of Gelboe, let neither dew, nor rain come upon you,
neither be they fields of firstfruits: for there was cast away the
shield of the valiant, the shield of Saul as though he had not been
anointed with oil.
From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the valiant, the
arrow of Jonathan never turned back, and the sword of Saul did not
return empty.
Saul and Jonathan, lovely, and comely in their life, even in death
they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, stronger than
lions.
Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you with
scarlet in delights, who gave ornaments of gold for your attire.
How are the valiant fallen in battle? Jonathan slain in the high
places?
I grieve for thee, my brother Jonathan: exceeding beautiful, and
amiable to me above the love of women. As the mother loveth her only
son, so did I love thee.
How are the valiant fallen, and the weapons of war perished?
reigneth over the rest of Israel. A battle between Abner and Joab.
And after these things David consulted the Lord, saying: Shall I go
up into one of the cities of Juda? And the Lord said to him: Go up. And
So David went up, and his two wives Achinoam the Jezrahelitess, and
And the men also that were with him, David brought up every man
with his household: and they abode in the towns of Hebron.
And the men of Juda came, and anointed David there, to be king over
the house of Juda. And it was told David that the men of Jabes Galaad
had buried Saul.
David therefore sent messengers to the men of Jabes Galaad, and
said to them: Blessed be you to the Lord, who have shewn this mercy to
your master Saul, and have buried him.
And now the Lord surely will render you mercy and truth, and I also
will requite you for this good turn, because you have done this thing.
Let your hands be strengthened, and be ye men of valour: for
although your master Saul be dead, yet the house of Juda hath anointed
me to be their king.
But Abner the son of Ner, general of Saul's army, took Isboseth the
son of Saul, and led him about through the camp,
And made him king over Galaad, and over Gessuri, and over Jezrahel,
and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.
Isboseth the son of Saul was forty years old when he began to
reign over Israel, and he reigned two years; and only the house of Juda
followed David.
all he reigned seven years and six months; for so long David reigned in
And the number of the days that David abode, reigning in Hebron
over the house of Juda, was seven years and six months.
And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Isboseth the son of
And Joab the son of Sarvia, and the servants of David went out,
and met them by the pool of Gabaon. And when they were come together,
they sat down over against one another: the one on the one side of the
pool, and the other on the other side.
And Abner said to Joab: Let the young men rise, and play before
us. And Joab answered: Let them rise.
Then there arose and went over twelve in number of Benjamin, of
the part of Isboseth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of
And every one catching his fellow by the head, thrust his sword
into the side of his adversary, and they fell down together: and the
name of the place was called: The field of the valiant, in Gabaon.
And there was a very fierce battle that day: and Abner was put to
flight, with the men of Israel, by the servants of David.
And there were the three sons of Sarvia there, Joab, and Abisai,
and Asael: now Asael was a most swift runner, like one of the roes that
abide in the woods.
And Asael pursued after Abner, and turned not to the right hand
nor to the left from following Abner.
And Abner looked behind him, and said: Art thou Asael? And he
answered: I am.
And Abner said to him: Go to the right hand or to the left, and
lay hold on one of the young men and take thee his spoils. But Asael
would not leave off following him close.
And again Abner said to Asael: Go off, and do not follow me, lest
up my face to Joab thy brother.
But he refused to hearken to him, and would not turn aside:
wherefore Abner struck him with his spear with a back stroke in the
groin, and thrust him through, and he died upon the spot: and all that
came to the place where Asael fell down and died stood still.
Now while Joab and Abisai pursued after Abner, the sun went down:
and they came as far as the hill of the aqueduct, that lieth over
against the valley by the way of the wilderness in Gabaon.
And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together to
And Abner cried out to Joab, and said: Shall thy sword rage unto
utter destruction? knowest thou not that it is dangerous to drive people
to despair? how long dost thou defer to bid the people cease from
pursuing after their brethren?
And Joab said: As the Lord liveth, if thou hadst spoke sooner,
even in the morning the people should have retired from pursuing after
their brethren.
Then Joab sounded the trumpet, and all the army stood still, and
did not pursue after Israel any farther, nor fight any more.
And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plains:
and they passed the Jordan, and having gone through all Beth-horon, came
to the camp.
And Joab returning, after he had left Abner, assembled all the
people: and there were wanting of David's servants nineteen men, beside
But the servants of David had killed of Benjamin, and of the men
that were with Abner, three hundred and sixty, who all died.
And they took Asael, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father
in Bethlehem and Joab, and the men that were with him, marched all the
night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.
treacherously slain by Joab.
Now there was a long war between the house of Saul and the house of
the house of Saul decaying daily.
or emulation than a war with arms; it lasted five years and a half.
And sons were born to David in Hebron: and his firstborn was Ammon
of Achinoam the Jezrahelitess:
And his second Cheleab of Abigail the wife of Nabal of Carmel: and
the third Absalom the son of Maacha the daughter of Tholmai king of
And the fourth Adonias, the son of Haggith: and the fifth Saphathia
the son of Abital:
And the sixth Jethraam of Egla the wife of David: these were born
to David In Hebron.
Now while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of
And Saul had a concubine named Respha, the daughter of Aia. And
Why didst thou go in to my father's concubine? And he was
exceedingly angry for the words of Isboseth, and said: Am I a dog's head
against Juda this day, who have shewn mercy to the house of Saul thy
father, and to his brethren and friends, and have not delivered thee
into the hands of David, and hast thou sought this day against me to
charge me with a matter concerning a woman?
So do God to Abner, and more also, unless as the Lord hath sworn to
That the kingdom be translated from the house of Saul, and the
throne of David be set up over Israel, and over Juda from Dan to
And he could not answer him a word, because he feared him.
Abner therefore sent messengers to David for himself, saying:
my hand shall be with thee: and I will bring all Israel to thee.
And he said: Very well: I will make a league with thee: but one
thing I require of thee, saying: Thou shalt not see my face before thou
bring Michol the daughter of Saul: and so thou shalt come, and see me.
And David sent messengers to Isboseth the son of Saul, saying:
the Philistines.
And Isboseth sent, and took her from her husband Phaltiel, the son
of Lais.
And her husband followed her, weeping as far as Bahurim: and Abner
said to him: Go and return. And he returned.
Abner also spoke to the ancients of Israel, saying: Both yesterday
and the day before you sought for David that he might reign over you.
Now then do it: because the Lord hath spoken to David, saying: By
the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel from the hands
of the Philistines, and of all their enemies.
And Abner spoke also to Benjamin. And he went to speak to David in
And he came to David in Hebron with twenty men: and David made a
feast for Abner, and his men that came with him.
And Abner said to David: I will rise, that I may gather all Israel
unto thee my lord the king, and may enter into a league with thee, and
that thou mayst reign over all as thy soul desireth. Now when David had
brought Abner on his way, and he was gone in peace,
Immediately, David's servants and Joab came, after having slain
the robbers, with an exceeding great booty. And Abner was not with David
in Hebron, for he had now sent him away, and he was gone in peace.
And Joab and all the army that was with him, came afterwards: and
it was told Joab, that Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he
hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace.
And Joab went in to the king, and said: What hast thou done?
and departed?
Knowest thou not Abner the son of Ner, that to this end he came to
thee, that he might deceive thee, and to know thy going out, and thy
coming in, and to know all thou dost?
Then Joab going out from David, sent messengers after Abner, and
brought him back from the cistern of Sira, David knowing nothing of it.
And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside to the
middle of the gate, to speak to him treacherously: and he stabbed him
there in the groin, and he died, in revenge of the blood of Asael his
brother.
And when David heard of it, after the thing was now done, he said:
And may it come upon the head of Joab, and upon all his father's
house: and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an
issue of seed, or that is a leper, or that holdeth the distaff, or that
falleth by the sword, or that wanteth bread.
So Joab and Abisai his brother slew Abner, because he had killed
their brother Asael at Gabaon in the battle.
And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him:
before the funeral of Abner. And king David himself followed the bier.
And when they had buried Abner in Hebron, king David lifted up his
voice, and wept at the grave of Abner: and all the people also wept.
And the king mourning and lamenting over Abner, said: Not as
cowards are wont to die, hath Abner died.
Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet laden with fetters: but as
men fall before the children of iniquity, so didst thou fall. And all
the people repeating it wept over him.
And when all the people came to take meat with David, while it was
yet broad day, David swore, saying: So do God to me, and more also, if I
taste bread or any thing else before sunset.
And all the people heard, and they were pleased, and all that the
king did seemed good in the sight of all the people.
And all the people, and all Israel understood that day that it was
not the king's doing, that Abner the son of Ner was slain.
The king also said to his servants: Do you not know that a prince
and a great man is slain this day in Israel?
But I as yet am tender, though anointed king. And these men the
sons of Sarvia are too hard for me: the Lord reward him that doth evil
according to his wickedness.
murderers.
And Isboseth the son of Saul heard that Abner was slain in Hebron:
and his hands were weakened, and all Israel was troubled.
Now the son of Saul had two men captains of his bands, the name of
the one was Baana, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Remmon
a Berothite of the children of Benjamin: for Beroth also was reckoned in
And the Berothites fled into Gethaim, and were sojourners there
until that time.
And Jonathan the son of Saul had a son that was lame of his feet:
for he was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan
from Jezrahel. And his nurse took him up and fled: and as she made haste
to flee, he fell and became lame: and his name was Miphiboseth.
And the sons of Remmon the Berothite, Rechab and Baana coming, went
into the house of Isboseth in the heat of the day: and he was sleeping
upon his bed at noon. And the doorkeeper of the house, who was cleansing
wheat, was fallen asleep.
And they entered into the house secretly taking ears of corn, and
For when they came into the house, he was sleeping upon his bed in
a parlour, and they struck him and killed him and taking away his head
they went off by the way of the wilderness, walking all night.
And they brought the head of Isboseth to David to Hebron: and they
said to the king: Behold the head of Isboseth the son of Saul thy enemy
who sought thy life: and the Lord hath revenged my lord the king this
day of Saul, and of his seed.
But David answered Rechab, and Baana his brother, the sons of
delivered my soul out of all distress,
The man that told me, and said: Saul is dead, who thought he
brought good tidings, I apprehended, and slew him in Siceleg, who should
have been rewarded for his news.
How much more now when wicked men have slain an innocent man in
his own house, upon his bed, shall I not require his blood at your hand,
and take you away from the earth?
And David commanded his servants and they slew them: and cutting
off their hands and feet, hanged them up over the pool in Hebron: but
the head of Isboseth they took and buried in the sepulchre of Abner in
there. He defeateth the Philistines.
Then all the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron, saying:
Moreover yesterday also and the day before, when Saul was king over
us, thou wast he that did lead out and bring in Israel: and the Lord
said to thee: Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince
over Israel.
The ancients also of Israel came to the king of Hebron, and king
anointed David to be king over Israel.
David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years.
In Hebron he reigned over Juda seven years and six months: and in
And the king and all the men that were with him went to Jerusalem
to the Jebusites the inhabitants of the land: and they said to David:
lame that say: David shall not come in hither.
But David took the castle of Sion, the same is the city of David.
For David had offered that day a reward to whosoever should strike
the Jebusites and get up to the gutters of the tops of the houses, and
take away the blind and the lame that hated the soul of David: therefore
it is said in the proverb: The blind and the lame shall not come into
the temple.
And David dwelt in the castle, and called it, The city of David:
and built round about from Mello and inwards.
And he went on prospering and growing up, and the Lord God of
hosts was with him.
And Hiram the king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar
trees, and carpenters, and masons for walls: and they built a house for
And David knew that the Lord had confirmed him king over Israel,
and that he had exalted his kingdom over his people Israel.
And David took more concubines and wives of Jerusalem, after he
was come from Hebron: and there were born to David other sons also and
daughters:
wives of an inferior condition; for such, in scripture, are styled
concubines.
And these are the names of them, that were born to him in
And Jebahar, and Elisua, and Nepheg,
And Japhia, and Elisama, and Elioda, and Eliphaleth.
And the Philistines heard that they had anointed David to be king
over Israel: and they all came to seek David: and when David heard of
it, he went down to a strong hold.
And the Philistines coming spread themselves in the valley of
And David consulted the Lord, Saying: Shall I go up to the
to David: Go up, for I will surely deliver the Philistines into thy
hand.
And David came to Baal Pharisim: and defeated them there, and he
said, The Lord hath divided my enemies before me, as waters are divided.
And they left there their idols: which David and his men took
away.
And the Philistines came up again and spread themselves into the
valley of Raphaim.
And David consulted the Lord: Shall I go up against the
not up against them but fetch a compass behind them, and thou shalt come
upon them over against the pear trees.
And when thou shalt hear the sound of one going in the tops of the
pear trees, then shalt thou join battle: for then will the Lord go out
before thy face to strike the army of the Philistines.
And David did as the Lord had commanded him, and he smote the
touching it. It is deposited in the house of Obededom: and from thence
carried to David's house.
And David again gathered together all the chosen men of Israel,
thirty thousand.
And David arose and went, with all the people that were with him of
the men of Juda to fetch the ark of God, upon which the name of the Lord
of Hosts is invoked, who sitteth over it upon the cherubims.
And they laid the ark of God upon a new cart: and took it out of
the house of Abinadab, who was in Gabaa, and Oza and Ahio, the sons of
of Abinadab, from the time of its being restored back by the
And when they had taken it out of the house of Abinadab, who was in
But David and all Israel played before the Lord on all manner of
instruments made of wood, on harps and lutes and timbrels and cornets
and cymbals.
And when they came to the floor of Nachon, Oza put forth his hand
to the ark of God, and took hold of it: because the oxen kicked and made
it lean aside.
And the indignation of the Lord was enkindled against Oza, and he
struck him for his rashness: and he died there before the ark of God.
And David was grieved because the Lord had struck Oza, and the name
of that place was called: The striking of Oza, to this day.
And David was afraid of the Lord that day, saying: How shall the
ark of the Lord come to me?
And he would not have the ark of the Lord brought in to himself
into the city of David: but he caused it to be carried into the house of
And the ark of the Lord abode in the house of Obededom the Gethite
three months: and the Lord blessed Obededom, and all his household.
And it was told king David, that the Lord had blessed Obededom,
and all that he had, because of the ark of God. So David went, and
brought away the ark of God out of the house of Obededom into the city
of David with joy. And there were with David seven choirs, and calves
for victims.
And when they that carried the ark of the Lord had gone six paces,
he sacrificed and ox and a ram:
And David danced with all his might before the Lord: and David was
girded with a linen ephod.
And David and all the louse of Israel brought the ark of the
covenant of the Lord with joyful shouting, and with sound of trumpet.
And when the ark of the Lord was come into the city of David,
heart.
And they brought the ark of the Lord, and set it in its place in
the midst of the tabernacle, which David had pitched for it: and David
offered holocausts, and peace offerings before the Lord.
And when he had made an end of offering holocausts and peace
offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts.
And he distributed to all the multitude of Israel, both men and
women, to every one, a cake of bread, and a piece of roasted beef, and
fine flour fried with oil: and all the people departed every one to his
own house.
And David returned to bless his own house: and Michol the daughter
of Saul coming out to meet David, said: How glorious was the king of
and was naked, as if one of the buffoons should be naked.
And David said to Michol: Before the Lord, who chose me rather
than thy father, and than all his house, and commanded me to be ruler
over the people of the Lord in Israel,
I will both play and make myself meaner than I have done: and I
will be little in my own eyes: and with the handmaids of whom thou
speakest, I shall appear more glorious.
Therefore Michol the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of
her death.
blessings in his seed: his prayer and thanksgiving.
And it came to pass when the king sat in his house, and the Lord
had given him rest on every side from all his enemies,
He said to Nathan the prophet: Dost thou see that I dwell in a
house of cedar, and the ark of God is lodged within skins?
And Nathan said to the king: Go, do all that is in they heart:
because the Lord is with thee.
But it came to pass that night, that the word of the Lord came to
Go, and say to my servant David: Thus saith the Lord: Shalt thou
build me a house to dwell in?
Whereas I have not dwelt in a house from the day that I brought the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt even to this day: but have
walked in a tabernacle, and in a tent.
In all the places that I have gone through with all the children of
a house of cedar?
And now thus shalt thou speak to my servant David: Thus saith the
to be ruler over my people Israel:
And I have been with thee wheresoever thou hast walked, and have
slain all thy enemies from before thy face: and I have made thee a great
man, like unto the name of the great ones that are on the earth.
And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and I will plant
them, and they shall dwell therein, and shall be disturbed no more:
neither shall the children of iniquity afflict them any more as they did
before,
From the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel: and I
will give thee rest from all thy enemies. And the Lord foretelleth to
thee, that the Lord will make thee a house.
And when thy days shall be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with
thy fathers, I will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed
out of the bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.
scripture, and who is the builder of the true temple, which is the
church, his everlasting kingdom, which shall never fail.
He shall build a house to my name, and I will establish the throne
of his kingdom fore ever.
I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son: and if he
commit any iniquity, I will correct him with the rod of men, and with
the stripes of the children of men.
But my mercy I will not take away from him, as I took it from
And thy house shall be faithful, and thy kingdom for ever before
thy face, and thy throne shall be firm for ever.
According to all these words and according to all this vision so
did Nathan speak to David.
And David went in, and sat before the Lord, and said: Who am I, O
Bur yet this hath seemed little in thy sight, O Lord God, unless
thou didst also speak of the house of thy servant for a long time to
come: for this is the law of Adam, O Lord God:
And what can David say more unto thee? for thou knowest thy
servant, O Lord God:
For thy word's sake, and according to thy own heart thou has done
all these great things, so that thou wouldst make it known to thy
servant.
Therefore thou art magnified, O Lord God, because there is none
like to thee, neither is there any God besides thee, in all the things
that we have heard with our ears.
And what nation is there upon earth, as thy people Israel, whom
to do for them great and terrible things, upon the earth, before the
face of thy people, whom thou redeemedst to thyself out of Egypt, from
the nations and their gods.
For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be an
everlasting people: and thou, O Lord God, art become their God.
And now, O Lord God, raise up for ever the word that thou hast
spoken, concerning thy servant and concerning his house: and do as thou
hast spoken,
That thy name may be magnified for ever, and it may be said: The
shall be established before the Lord.
Because thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to the
ear of thy servant, saying: I will build thee a house: therefore hath
thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer to thee.
And now, O Lord God, thou art God, and thy words shall be true:
for thou hast spoken to thy servant these good things.
And now begin, and bless the house of thy servant, that it may
endure for ever before thee: because thou, O Lord God, hast spoken it,
and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever.
And it came to pass after this that David defeated the Philistines,
and brought them down, and David took the bridle of tribute out of the
hand of the Philistines,
And he defeated Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them
down to the earth: and he measured with two lines, one to put to death,
and one to save alive: and Moab was made to serve David under tribute.
David defeated also Adarezer the son of Rohob king of Soba, when he
went to extend his dominion over the river Euphrates.
And David took from him a thousand and seven hundred horsemen, and
twenty thousand footmen, and houghed all the chariot horses: and only
reserved of them for one hundred chariots.
And the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Adarezer the king of
And David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and Syria served
enterprises, whithersoever he went.
And David took the arms of gold, which the servants of Adarezer
wore and brought them to Jerusalem.
And out of Bete, and out of Beroth, cities of Adarezer, king David
took and exceeding great quantity of brass.
And Thou the king of Emath heard that David had defeated all the
forces of Adarezer.
And Thou sent Joram his son to king David, to salute him, and to
congratulate with him, and to return him thanks: because he had fought
against Adarezer, and had defeated him. For Thou was an enemy to
and vessels of brass:
And king David dedicated them to the Lord, together with the
silver and gold that he had dedicated of all the nations, which he had
subdued:
Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children Ammon, and of the
David also made himself a name, when he returned after taking
And he put guards in Edom, and placed there a garrison: and all
enterprises he went about.
And David reigned over all Israel: and David did judgment and
justice to all his people.
And Joab the son Sarvia was over the army: and Josaphat the son of
And Sadoc the son of Achitob, and Achimelech the son of Abiathar,
were the priests: and Saraias was the scribe:
And Banaias the son of Joiada was over the Cerethi and Phelethi:
and the sons of David were the princes.
exercising the priestly functions.
And David said: Is there any one, think you, left of the house of
Now there was of the house of Saul, a servant named Siba: and when
the king had called him to him, he said to him: Art thou Siba? And he
answered: I am Siba thy servant.
And the king said: Is there any one left of the house of Saul, that
is a son of Jonathan left, who is lame of his feet.
Where is he? said he. And Siba said to the king: Behold he is in
the house of Machir the son of Ammiel in Lodabar.
Then King David sent, and brought him out of the house of Machir
the son of Ammiel of Lodabar.
And when Miphiboseth the son of Jonathan the son of Saul was come
to David, he fell on his face and worshipped. And David said:
And David said to him: Fear not, for I will surely shew thee mercy
for Jonathan thy father's sake, and I will restore the lands of Saul the
father, and thou shalt eat bread at my table always.
He bowed down to him, and said: Who am I thy servant, that thou
shouldst look upon such a dead dog as I am?
Then the King called Siba the servant of Saul, and said to him: All
that belonged to Saul, and all his house, I have given to thy master's
son.
Thou therefore and the sons and thy servants shall till the land
for him: and thou shalt bring in food for thy master's son, that he may
be maintained: and Miphiboseth the son of thy master shall always eat
bread at my table. And Siba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
And Siba said to the king: As thou my lord the hast commanded thy
servant, so will thy servant do: and Miphiboseth shall eat at my table,
as one of the sons of the King.
And Miphiboseth had a young son whose name was Micha: and all that
kindred of the house of Siba served Miphiboseth.
But Miphiboseth dwelt in Jerusalem: because he ate always of the
king's table: and he was lame of both feet.
And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of
And David said: I will shew kindness to Hanon the son of Daas, as
his father shewed kindness to me. So David sent his servants to comfort
him for the death of his father. But when the servants of David were
come into the land of the children of Ammon,
The princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanon their lord:
comforters to thee, and hath not David rather sent his servants to thee
to search, and spy into the city, and overthrow it?
Wherefore Hanon took the servants of David, and shaved off the one
half of their beards, and cut away half of their garments even to the
buttocks, and sent them away.
When this was told David, he sent to meet them: for the men were
sadly put to confusion, and David commanded them, saying: Stay at
And the children of Ammon seeing that they had done an injury to
twenty thousand footmen, and of the king of Maacha a thousand men, and
of Istob twelve thousand men.
And when David heard this, he sent Joab and the whole army of
warriors.
And the children of Ammon came out, and set their men in array at
the entering in of the gate: but the Syrians of Soba, and of Rohob, and
of Istob, and of Maacha were by themselves in the field.
Then Joab seeing that the battle was prepared against him, both
before and behind, chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them
in array against the Syrians:
And the rest of the people he delivered to Abisai his brother,
who set them in array against the children of Ammon.
And Joab said: If the Syrians are too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me, but if the children of Ammon are too strong for thee,
then I will help thee.
Be of good courage, and let us fight for our people, and for the
city of our God: and the Lord will do what is good in his sight.
And Joab and the people that were with him, began to fight
against the Syrians: and they immediately fled before him.
And the children of Ammon seeing that the Syrians were fled, they
fled also before Abisai, and entered into the city: and Joab returned
from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.
Then the Syrians seeing that they had fallen before Israel,
gathered themselves together.
And Adarezer sent and fetched the Syrians, that were beyond the
river, and brought over their army: and Sobach, the captain of the host
of Adarezer, was their general.
And when this was told David, he gathered all Israel together,
and passed over the Jordan, and came to Helam: and the Syrians set
themselves in array against David, and fought against him.
And the Syrians fled before Israel, and David slew of the Syrians
the men of seven hundred chariots, and forty thousand horsemen: and
smote Sobach the captain of the army, who presently died.
And all the kings that were auxiliaries of Adarezer, seeing
themselves overcome by Israel, were afraid and fled away, eight and
fifty thousand men before Israel. And they made peace with Israel: and
served them, and all the Syrians were afraid to help the children of
other means to conceal it, causeth her husband Urias to be slain. Then
marrieth her, who beareth him a son.
And it came to pass at the return of the year, at the time when
kings go forth to war, that David sent Joab and his servants with him,
and all Israel, and they spoiled the children of Ammon, and besieged
In the mean time it happened that David arose from his bed after
noon, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: And he saw from the
roof of his house a woman washing herself, over against him: and the
woman was very beautiful.
And the king sent, and inquired who the woman was. And it was told
him, that she was Bethsabee the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Urias the
And David sent messengers, and took her, and she came in to him,
and he slept with her: and presently she was purified from her
uncleanness:
And she returned to her house having conceived. And she sent and
told David, and said: I have conceived.
And David sent to Joab, saying: Send me Urias the Hethite. And
And Urias came to David. And David asked how Joab did, and the
people, and how the war was carried on.
And David said to Urias: Go into thy house, and wash thy feet. And
mess of meat from the king.
But Urias slept before the gate of the king's house, with the
other servants of his lord, and went not down to his own house.
And it was told David by some that said: Urias went not to his
house. And David said to Urias: Didst thou not come from thy journey?
why didst thou not go down to thy house?
And Urias said to David: The ark of God and Israel and Juda dwell
in tents, and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord abide upon the
face of the earth: and shall I go into my house, to eat and to drink,
and to sleep with my wife? By thy welfare and by the welfare of thy soul
Then David said to Urias: Tarry here to day, and to morrow I will
send thee away. Urias tarried in Jerusalem that day and the next.
And David called him to eat and to drink before him, and he made
him drunk: and he went out in the evening, and slept on his couch with
the servants of his lord, and went not down into his house.
And when the morning was come, David wrote a letter to Joab: and
sent it by the hand of Urias,
Writing in the letter: Set ye Urias in the front of the battle,
where the fight is strongest: and leave ye him, that he may be wounded
and die.
Wherefore as Joab was besieging the city, he put Urias in the
place where he knew the bravest men were.
And the men coming out of the city, fought against Joab, and
there fell some of the people of the servants of David, and Urias the
Then Joab sent, and told David all things concerning the battle.
And he charged the messenger, saying: When thou hast told all the
words of the battle to the king,
If thou see him to be angry, and he shall say: Why did you
approach so near to the wall to fight? knew you not that many darts are
thrown from above off the wall?
Who killed Abimelech the son of Jerobaal? did not a woman cast a
piece of a millstone upon him from the wall and slew him in Thebes? Why
did you go near the wall? Thou shalt say: Thy servant Urias the Hethite
is also slain.
So the messenger departed, and came and told David all that Joab
had commanded him.
And the messenger said to David: The men prevailed against us,
and they came out to us into the field: and we vigorously charged and
pursued them even to the gate of the city.
And the archers shot their arrows at thy servants from off the
wall above: and some of the king's servants are slain, and thy servant
And David said to the messenger: Thus shalt thou say to Joab: Let
not this thing discourage thee: for various is the event of war: and
sometimes one, sometimes another is consumed by the sword: encourage thy
warriors against the city, and exhort them that thou mayest overthrow
it.
And the wife of Urias heard that Urias her husband was dead, and
she mourned for him.
And the mourning being over, David sent and brought her into his
house, and she became his wife, and she bore him a son: and this thing
which David had done, was displeasing to the Lord.
to be sentenced to most severe temporal punishments. The death of the
child. The birth of Solomon. The taking of Rabbath.
And the Lord sent Nathan to David: and when he was come to him, he
said to him: There were two men in one city, the one rich, and the other
poor.
The rich man had exceeding many sheep and oxen.
But the poor man had nothing at all but one little ewe lamb, which
he had bought and nourished up, and which had grown up in his house
together with his children, eating of his bread, and drinking of his
cup, and sleeping in his bosom: and it was unto him as a daughter.
And when a certain stranger was come to the rich man, he spared to
take of his own sheep and oxen, to make a feast for that stranger, who
was come to him, but took the poor man's ewe, and dressed it for the man
that was come to him.
And David's anger being exceedingly kindled against that man, he
said to Nathan: As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this is a
child of death.
He shall restore the ewe fourfold, because he did this thing, and
had no pity.
And Nathan said to David: Thou art the man. Thus saith the Lord
the God of Israel: I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered
thee from the hand of Saul,
And gave thee thy master's house and thy master's wives into thy
bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and Juda: and if these things
be little, I shall add far greater things unto thee.
Why therefore hast thou despised the word of the Lord, to do evil
in my sight? Thou hast killed Urias the Hethite with the sword, and hast
taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the
children of Ammon.
Therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house, because
thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Urias the Hethite to
be thy wife.
Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will raise up evil against thee
out of thy own house, and I will take thy wives before thy eyes and give
them to thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of
this sun.
came upon David by a just judgment of God, for his sin, and therefore
part of Absalom and his associates, God was not the author of them, but
only permitted them.
For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing in the sight
of all Israel, and in the sight of the sun.
And David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord. And
not die.
Nevertheless, because thou hast given occasion to the enemies of
the Lord to blaspheme, for this thing, the child that is born to thee,
shall surely die.
And Nathan returned to his house. The Lord also struck the child
which the wife of Urias had borne to David, and his life was despaired
of.
And David besought the Lord for the child: and David kept a fast,
and going in by himself lay upon the ground.
And the ancients of his house came, to make him rise from the
ground: but he would not, neither did he eat meat with them.
And it came to pass on the seventh day that the child died: and
the servants of David feared to tell him, that the child was dead. For
they said: Behold when the child was yet alive, we spoke to him, and he
would not hearken to our voice: how much more will he afflict himself if
we tell him that the child is dead?
But when David saw his servants whispering, he understood that
the child was dead: and he said to his servants: Is the child dead? They
answered him He is dead.
Then David arose from the ground, and washed and anointed
himself: and when he had changed his apparel, he went into the house of
the Lord: and worshipped, and then he came into his own house, and he
called for bread, and ate.
And his servants said to him: What thing is this that thou hast
done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive, but
when the child was dead, thou didst rise up, and eat bread.
And he said: While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept for
him: for I said: Who knoweth whether the Lord may not give him to me,
and the child may live?
But now that he is dead, why should I fast? Shall I be able to
bring him back any more? I shall go to him rather: but he shall not
return to me.
And David comforted Bethsabee his wife, and went in unto her, and
slept with her: and she bore a son, and he called his name Solomon, and
the Lord loved him.
And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and called his
name, Amiable to the Lord, because the Lord loved him.
And Joab fought against Rabbath of the children of Ammon, and
laid close siege to the royal city.
And Joab sent messengers to David, saying: I have fought against
called the city of waters, from being encompassed with waters.
Now therefore gather thou the rest of the people together, and
besiege the city and take it: lest when the city shall be wasted by me,
the victory be ascribed to my name.
Then David gathered all the people together, and went out against
And he took the crown of their king from his head, the weight of
which was a talent of gold, set with most precious stones, and it was
put upon David's head, and the spoils of the city which were very great
he carried away.
And bringing forth the people thereof he sawed them, and drove
over them chariots armed with iron: and divided them with knives, and
made them pass through brickkilns: so did he to all the cities of the
children of Ammon: and David returned, with all the army to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass after this that Ammon the son of David loved
the sister of Absalom the son of David, who was very beautiful, and her
name was Thamar.
And he was exceedingly fond of her, so that he fell sick for the
love of her: for as she was a virgin, he thought it hard to do any thing
dishonestly with her.
Now Ammon had a friend, named Jonadab the son of Semmaa the
brother of David, a very wise man:
gave on this occasion shews that his wisdom was but carnal and worldly.
And he said to him: Why dost thou grow so lean from day to day, O
son of the king? why dost thou not tell me the reason of it? And Ammon
said to him: I am in love with Thamar the sister of my brother Absalom.
And Jonadab said to him: Lie down upon thy bed, and feign thyself
sick: and when thy father shall come to visit thee, say to him: Let my
sister Thamar, I pray thee, come to me, to give me to eat, and to make
me a mess, that I may eat it at her hand.
So Ammon lay down, and made as if he were sick: and when the king
came to visit him, Ammon said to the king: I pray thee let my sister
her hand.
Then David sent home to Thamar, saying: Come to the house of thy
brother Ammon, and make him a mess.
And Thamar came to the house of Ammon her brother: but he was laid
down: and she took meal and tempered it: and dissolving it in his sight
she made little messes.
And taking what she had boiled, she poured it out, and set it
before him, but he would not eat: and Ammon said: Put out all persons
from me. And when they had put all persons out,
Ammon said to Thamar: Bring the mess into the chamber, that I may
eat at thy hand. And Thamar took the little messes which she had made,
and brought them in to her brother Ammon in the chamber.
And when she had presented him the meat, he took hold of her, and
said: Come lie with me, my sister.
She answered him: Do not so, my brother, do not force me: for no
such thing must be done in Israel. Do not thou this folly.
For I shall not be able to bear my shame, and thou shalt be as
one of the fools in Israel: but rather speak to the king, and he will
not deny me to thee.
But he would not hearken to her prayers, but being stronger
overpowered her and lay with her.
Then Ammon hated her with an exceeding great hatred: so that the
hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love with which he
had loved her before. And Ammon said to her: Arise, and get thee gone.
She answered him: The evil which now thou dost against me, in
driving me away, is greater than that which thou didst before. And he
would not hearken to her:
But calling the servants that ministered to him, he said: Thrust
this woman out from me: and shut the door after her.
And she was clothed with a long robe: for the king's daughters
that were virgins, used such kind of garments. Then his servant thrust
her out: and shut the door after her.
And she put ashes on her head, and rent her long robe and laid
her hands upon her head, and went on crying.
And Absalom her brother said to her: Hath thy brother Ammon lain
with thee? but now, sister, hold thy peace, he is thy brother: and
afflict not thy heart for this thing. So Thamar remained pining away in
the house of Absalom her brother.
And when king David heard of these things he was exceedingly
grieved: and he would not afflict the spirit of his son Ammon, for he
loved him, because he was his firstborn.
But Absalom spoke not to Ammon neither good nor evil: for Absalom
hated Ammon because he had ravished his sister Thamar.
And it came to pass after two years, that the sheep of Absalom
were shorn in Baalhasor, which is near Ephraim: and Absalom invited all
the king's sons:
And he came to the king, and said to him: Behold thy servant's
sheep are shorn. Let the king, I pray, with his servants come to his
servant.
And the king said to Absalom: Nay, my son, do not ask that we
should all come, and be chargeable to thee. And when he pressed him, and
he would not go, he blessed him.
And Absalom said: If thou wilt not come, at least let my brother
necessary that he should go with thee.
But Absalom pressed him, so that he let Ammon and all the king's
sons go with him. And Absalom made a feast as it were the feast of a
king.
And Absalom had commanded his servants, saying: Take notice when
and kill him, fear not: for it is I that command you: take courage, and
be valiant men.
And the servants of Absalom did to Ammon as Absalom had commanded
them. And all the king's sons arose and got up every man upon his mule,
and fled.
And while they were yet in the way, a rumour came to David,
saying: Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is not one
them left.
Then the king rose up, and rent his garments: and fell upon the
ground, and all his servants, that stood about him, rent their garments.
But Jonadab the son of Semmaa David's brother answering, said:
only is dead, for he was appointed by the mouth of Absalom from the day
that he ravished his sister Thamar.
Now therefore let not my lord the king take this thing into his
heart, saying: All the king's sons are slain: for Ammon only is dead.
But Absalom fled away: and the young man that kept the watch,
lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold there came much people by a
by-way on the side of the mountain.
And Jonadab said to the king: Behold the king's sons are come: as
thy servant said, so it is.
And when he made an end of speaking, the king's sons also
appeared: and coming in they lifted up their voice, and wept: and the
king also and all his servants wept very much.
But Absalom fled, and went to Tholomai the son of Ammiud the king
of Gessur. And David mourned for his son every day.
And Absalom after he was fled, and come into Gessur, was there
three years. And king David ceased to pursue after Absalom, because he
was comforted concerning the death of Ammon.
presence.
And Joab the son of Sarvia, understanding that the king's heart
was turned to Absalom,
Sent to Thecua, and fetched from thence a wise woman: and said to
her: Feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on mourning apparel, and be
not anointed with oil, that thou mayest be as a woman that had a long
time been mourning for one dead.
And thou shalt go in to the king, and shalt speak to him in this
manner. And Joab put the words in her mouth.
And when the woman of Thecua was come in to the king, she fell
before him upon the ground, and worshipped, and said: Save me, O king.
And the king said to her: What is the matter with thee? She
answered: Alas, I am a widow woman: for my husband is dead.
And thy handmaid had two sons: and they quarrelled with each other
in the field, and there was none to part them: and the one struck the
other, and slew him.
And behold the whole kindred rising against thy handmaid, saith:
life of his brother, whom he slew, and that we may destroy the heir: and
they seek to quench my spark which is left, and will leave my husband no
name, nor remainder upon the earth.
And the king said to the woman: Go to thy house, and I will give
charge concerning thee.
And the woman of Thecua said to the king: Upon me, my lord be the
iniquity, and upon the house of my father: but may the king and his
throne be guiltless.
And the king said: If any one shall say ought against thee, bring
him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.
And she said: Let the king remember the Lord his God, that the
next of kin be not multiplied to take revenge, and that they may not
kill my son. And he said: As the Lord liveth, there shall not one hair
of thy son fall to the earth.
The woman said: Let thy hand maid speak one word to my lord the
king. And he said: Speak.
And the woman said: Why hast thou thought such a thing against
the people of God, and why hath the king spoken this word, to sin, and
not bring home again his own exile?
We all die, and like waters that return no more, we fall down
into the earth: neither will God have a soul to perish, but recalleth,
meaning that he that is cast off should not altogether perish.
Now therefore I am come, to speak this word to my lord the king
before the people. And thy handmaid said: I will speak to the king, it
maybe the king will perform the request of his handmaid.
And the king hath hearkened to me to deliver his handmaid out of
the hand of all that would destroy me and my son together out of the
inheritance of God.
Then let thy handmaid say, that the word of the Lord the king be
made as a sacrifice. For even as an angel of God, so is my lord the
king, that he is neither moved with blessing nor cursing: wherefore the
And the king answering, said to the woman: Hide not from me the
thing that I ask thee. And the woman said to him: Speak, my lord the
king.
And the king said: Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this?
king, it is neither on the left hand, nor on the right, in all these
things which my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he
commanded me, and he put all these words into the mouth of thy handmaid.
That I should come about with this form of speech, thy servant
the wisdom of an angel of God, to understand all things upon earth.
And the king said to Joab: Behold I am appeased and have granted
thy request: Go therefore and fetch back the boy Absalom.
And Joab falling down to the ground upon his face, adored, and
blessed the king: and Joab said: This day thy servant hath understood,
that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king: for thou hast
fulfilled the request of thy servant.
Then Joab arose and went to Gessur, and brought Absalom to
But the king said: Let him return into his house, and let him not
see my face. So Absalom returned into his house, and saw not the king's
face.
But in all Israel there was not a man so comely, and so
exceedingly beautiful as Absalom: from the sole of the foot to the crown
of his head there was no blemish in him.
And when he polled his hair (now he was polled once a year,
because his hair was burdensome to him) he weighed the hair of his head
at two hundred sicles, according to the common weight.
And there were born to Absalom three sons: and one daughter,
whose name was Thamar, and she was very beautiful.
And Absalom dwelt two years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king's
face.
He sent therefore to Joab, to send him to the king: but he would
not come to him. And when he had sent the second time, and he would not
come to him,
He said to his servants: You know the field of Joab near my
field, that hath a crop of barley: go now and set it on fire. So the
servants of Absalom set the corn on fire. And Joab's servants coming
with their garments rent, said: The servants of Absalom have set part of
the field on fire.
Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom to his house, and said: Why
have thy servants set my corn on fire?
And Absalom answered Joab: I sent to thee beseeching thee to come
to me, that I might send thee to the king, to say to him: Wherefore am I
come from Gessur? it had been better for me to be there: I beseech thee
therefore that I may see the face of the king: and if he be mindful of
my iniquity, let him kill me.
So Joab going in to the king, told him all: and Absalom was
called for, and, he went in to the king: and prostrated himself on the
ground before him: and the king kissed Absalom.
Now after these things Absalom made himself chariots, and
horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.
And Absalom rising up early stood by the entrance of the gate, and
when any man had business to come to the king's judgment, Absalom called
him to him, and said: Of what city art thou? He answered, and said: Thy
servant is of such tribe of Israel.
And Absalom answered him: Thy words seem to me good and just. But
there is no man appointed by the king to hear thee. And Absalom said:
O that they would make me judge over the land, that all that have
business might come to me, that I might do them justice.
Moreover when any man came to him to salute him, he put forth his
hand, and took him, and kissed him.
And this he did to all Israel that came for judgment, to be heard
by the king, and he enticed the hearts of the men of Israel.
And after forty years, Absalom said to king David: Let me go, and
pay my vows which I have vowed to the Lord in Hebron.
For thy servant made a vow, when he was in Gessur of Syria,
saying: If the Lord shall bring me again into Jerusalem, I will offer
sacrifice to the Lord.
And king David said to him: Go in peace. And he arose, and went to
And Absalom sent spies into all the tribes of Israel, saying: As
soon as you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, say ye: Absalom
reigneth in Hebron.
Now there went with Absalom two hundred men out of Jerusalem that
were called, going with simplicity of heart, and knowing nothing of the
design.
Absalom also sent for Achitophel the Gilonite, David's
counsellor, from his city Gilo. And while he was offering sacrifices,
there was a strong conspiracy, and the people running together increased
with Absalom.
And there came a messenger to David, saying: All Israel with
their whole heart followeth Absalom.
And David said to his servants, that were with him in Jerusalem:
ruin upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.
And the king's servants said to him: Whatsoever our lord the king
shall command, we thy servants will willingly execute.
And the king went forth, and all his household on foot: and the
king left ten women his concubines to keep the house:
And the king going forth and all Israel on foot, stood afar off
from the house:
And all his servants walked by him, and the bands of the Cerethi,
and the Phelethi, and all the Gethites, valiant warriors, six hundred
men who had followed him from Geth on foot, went before the king.
And the king said to Ethai the Gethite: Why comest thou with us:
return and dwell with the king, for thou art a stranger, and art come
out of thy own place.
Yesterday thou camest, and to day shalt thou be forced to go
forth with us? but I shall go whither I am going: return thou, and take
back thy brethren with thee, and the Lord will shew thee mercy, and
truth, because thou hast shewn grace and fidelity.
And Ethai answered the king, saying: As the Lord liveth, and as
my lord the king liveth: in what place soever thou shalt be, my lord, O
king, either in death, or in life, there will thy servant be.
And David said to Ethai: Come, and pass over. And Ethai the
people.
And they all wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed
over: the king also himself went over the brook Cedron, and all the
people marched towards the way that looketh to the desert.
And Sadoc the priest also came, and all the Levites with him
carrying the ark of the covenant of God, and they set down the ark of
city had done passing.
And the king said to Sadoc: Carry back the ark of God into the
city: if I shall find grace in the sight of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and he will shew me it, and his tabernacle.
But if he shall say to me: Thou pleasest me not: I am ready, let
him do that which is good before him.
And the king said to Sadoc the priest: O seer, return into the
city in peace: and let Achimaas thy son, and Jonathan the son of
Behold I will lie hid in the plains of the wilderness, till there
come word from you to certify me.
So Sadoc and Abiathar carried back the ark of God into Jerusalem:
and they tarried there.
But David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, going up and
weeping, walking barefoot, and with his head covered, and all the people
that were with them, went up with their heads covered weeping.
were the cause of all his sufferings.
And it was told David that Achitophel also was in the conspiracy
with Absalom, and David said: Infatuate, O Lord, I beseech thee, the
counsel of Achitophel.
And when David was come to the top of the mountain, where he was
about to adore the Lord, behold Chusai the Arachite, came to meet him
with his garment rent and his head covered with earth.
And David said to him: If thou come with me, thou wilt be a
burden to me:
But if thou return into the city, and wilt say to Absalom: I am
thy servant, O king: as I have been thy father's servant, so I will be
thy servant: thou shalt defeat the counsel of Achitophel.
And thou hast with thee Sadoc, and soever thou shalt hear out of
the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Sadoc and Abiathar the priests.
And there are with them their two sons Achimaas; the son of
me every thing that you shall hear.
Then Chusai the friend of David went into the city, and Absalom
came into Jerusalem.
his father's wives.
And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold Siba
the servant of Miphiboseth came to meet him with two asses, laden with
two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred bunches of raisins, a hundred
cakes of figs, and a vessel of wine.
And the king said to Siba: What mean these things? And Siba
answered: The asses are for the king's household to sit on: and the
loaves and the figs for thy servants to eat, and the wine to drink if
any man be faint in the desert.
And the king said: Where is thy master's son? And Siba answered
the king: He remained in Jerusalem, saying: To day, will the house of
And the king said to Siba: I give thee all that belonged to
thee, my lord, O king.
And king David came as far as Bahurim: and behold there came out
from thence a man of the kindred of the house of Saul named Semei, the
son of Gera, and coming out he cursed as he went on,
And he threw stones at David, and at all the servants of king
on the left side of the king.
And thus said Semei when he cursed the king: Come out, come out,
thou man of blood, and thou man of Belial.
The Lord hath repaid thee for all the blood of the house of Saul:
because thou hast usurped the kingdom in his stead, and the Lord hath
given the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and behold thy evils
press upon thee, because thou art a man of blood.
And Abisai the son of Sarvia said to the king: Why should this
dead dog curse my lord the king? I will go, and cut off his head.
And the king said: What have I to do with you, ye sons of Sarvia?
and who is he that shall dare say, why hath he done so?
which proceeded purely from his own malice, and the abuse of his free
will. But that knowing, and suffering his malicious disposition to break
out on this occasion, he made use of him as his instrument to punish
And the king said to Abisai, and to all his servants: Behold my
son, who came forth from my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now a
son of Jemini? let him alone that he may curse as the Lord hath bidden
him.
Perhaps the Lord may look upon my affliction, and the Lord may
render me good for the cursing of this day.
And David and his men with him went by the way. And Semei by the
hill's side went over against him, cursing, and casting stones at him,
and scattering earth.
And the king and all the people with him came weary, and
refreshed themselves there.
But Absalom and all his people came into Jerusalem, and
And when Chusai the Arachite, David's friend, was come to
And Absalom said to him, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Why
wentest thou not with thy friend?
And Chusai answered Absalom: Nay: for I will be his, whom the
Besides this, whom shall I serve? is it not the king's son? as I
have served thy father, so will I serve thee also.
And Absalom said to Achitophel: Consult what we are to do.
And Achitophel said to Absalom: Go in to the concubines of thy
father, whom he hath left to keep the house: that when all Israel shall
hear that thou hast disgraced thy father, their hands may be
strengthened with thee.
him with some fear of being left in the lurch, till they saw such a
crime committed as seemed to make a reconciliation impossible.
So they spread a tent for Absalom on the top of the house, and he
went in to his father's concubines before all Israel.
Now the counsel of Achitophel, which he gave in those days, was
as if a man should consult God: so was all the counsel of Achitophel,
both when he was with David, and when he was with Absalom.
And Achitophel said to Absalom: I will choose me twelve thousand
men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night.
And coming upon him (for he is now weary, and weak handed) I will
defeat him: and when all the people is put to flight that is with him, I
will kill the king who will be left alone.
And I will bring back all the people, as if they were but one man:
for thou seekest but one man: and all the people shall be in peace.
And his saying pleased Absalom, and all the ancients of Israel.
But Absalom said: Call Chusai the Arachite, and let us hear what
he also saith.
And when Chusai was come to Absalom, Absalom said to him:
counsel dost thou give?
And Chusai said to Absalom: The counsel that Achitophel hath given
this time is not good.
And again Chusai said: Thou knowest thy father, and the men that
are with him, that they are very valiant, and bitter in their mind, as a
bear raging in the wood when her whelps are taken away: and thy father
is a warrior, and will not lodge with the people.
Perhaps he now lieth hid in pits, or in some other place where he
liest: and when any one shall fall at the first, every one that heareth
it shall say: There is a slaughter among the people that followed
And the most valiant man whose heart is as the heart of a lion,
shall melt for fear: for all the people of Israel know thy father to be
a valiant man, and that all who are with him are valiant.
But this seemeth to me to be good counsel: Let all Israel be
gathered to thee, from Dan to Bersabee, as the sand of the sea which
cannot be numbered: and thou shalt be in the midst of them.
And we shall come upon him in what place soever he shall be
found: and we shall cover him, as the dew falleth upon the ground, and
we shall not leave of the men that are with him, not so much as one.
And if he shall enter into any city, all Israel shall cast ropes
round about that city, and we will draw it into the river, so that there
shall not be found so much as one small stone thereof.
And Absalom, and all the men of Israel said: The counsel of
will of the Lord the profitable counsel of Achitophel was defeated, that
the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom.
And Chusai said to Sadoc and Abiathar the priests: Thus and thus
did Achitophel counsel Absalom, and the ancients of Israel: and thus and
thus did I counsel them.
Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying: Tarry not
this night in the plains of the wilderness, but without delay pass over:
lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that is with him.
And Jonathan and Achimaas stayed by the fountain Rogel: and there
went a maid and told them: and they went forward, to carry the message
to king David, for they might not be seen, nor enter into the city.
But a certain boy saw them, and told Absalom: but they making
haste went into the house of a certain man in Bahurim, who had a well in
his court, and they went down into it.
And a woman took, and spread a covering over the mouth of the
well, as it were to dry sodden barley and so the thing was not known.
And when Absalom's servants were come into the house, they said
to the woman: Where is Achimaas and Jonathan? and the woman answered
them: They passed on in haste, after they had tasted a little water. But
they that sought them, when they found them not, returned into
And when they were gone, they came up out of the well, and going
on told king David, and said: Arise, and pass quickly over the river:
for this manner of counsel has Achitophel given against you.
So David arose, and all the people that were with him, and they
passed over the Jordan, until it grew light, and not one of them was
left that was not gone ever the river.
But Achitophel seeing that his counsel was not followed, saddled
his ass, and arose and went home to his house and to his city, and
putting his house in order, hanged himself, and was buried in the
sepulchre of his father.
But David came to the camp, and Absalom passed over the Jordan,
he and all the men of Israel with him.
signifies The camp. It was a city of note at that time, as appears from
its having been chosen by Isboseth for the place of his residence.
Now Absalom appointed Amasa in Joab's stead over the army: and
in to Abigail the daughter of Naas, the sister of Sarvia who was the
mother of Joab.
And Israel camped with Absalom in the land of Galaad.
And when David was come to the camp, Sobi the son of Naas of
Brought him beds, and tapestry, and earthen vessels, and wheat,
and barley, and meal, and parched corn, and beans, and lentils, and
fried pulse,
And honey, and butter, and sheep, and fat calves, and they gave
to David and the people that were with him, to eat: for they suspected
that the people were faint with hunger and thirst in the wilderness.
And David, having reviewed his people, appointed over them
captains of thousands and of hundreds,
And sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of Joab,
and a third part under the hand of Abisai the son of Sarvia Joab's
brother, and a third part under the hand of Ethai, who was of Geth: and
the king said to the people: I also will go forth with you.
And the people answered: Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not much mind us: or if half of us should fall, they
will not greatly care: for thou alone art accounted for ten thousand: it
is better therefore that thou shouldst be in the city to succour us.
And the king said to them: What seemeth good to you, that will I
do. And the king stood by the gate: and all the people went forth by
their troops, by hundreds and by thousands.
And the king commanded Joab, and Abisai, and Ethai, saying: Save
me the boy Absalom. And all the people heard the king giving charge to
all the princes concerning Absalom.
So the people went out into the field against Israel, and the
battle was fought in the forest of Ephraim.
And the people of Israel were defeated there by David's army, and
a great slaughter was made that day of twenty thousand men.
And the battle there was scattered over the face of all the
country, and there were many more of the people whom the forest
consumed, than whom the sword devoured that day.
And it happened that Absalom met the servants of David, riding on
a mule: and as the mule went under a thick and large oak, his head stuck
in the oak: and while he hung between the heaven and the earth, the mule
on which he rode passed on.
And one saw this and told Joab, saying: I saw Absalom hanging
upon an oak.
And Joab said to the man that told him: If thou sawest him, why
didst thou not stab him to the ground, and I would have given thee ten
sicles of silver, and a belt?
And he said to Joab: If thou wouldst have paid down in my hands a
thousand pieces of silver, I would not lay my hands upon the king's son
for in our hearing the king charged thee, and Abisai, and Ethai, saying:
Yea and if I should have acted boldly against my own life, this
could not have been hid from the king, and wouldst thou have stood by
me?
And Joab said: Not as thou wilt, but I will set upon him in thy
sight. So he took three lances in his hand, and thrust them into the
heart of Absalom: and whilst he yet panted for life, sticking on the
oak,
Ten young men, armourbearers of Joab, ran up, and striking him
slew him.
And Joab sounded the trumpet, and kept back the people from
pursuing after Israel in their flight, being willing to spare the
multitude.
And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the
forest, and they laid an exceeding great heap of stones upon him: but
all Israel fled to their own dwellings.
Now Absalom had reared up for himself, in his lifetime, a pillar,
which is in the king's valley: for he said: I have no son, and this
shall be the monument of my name. And he called the pillar by his own
name, and it is called the hand of Absalom, to this day.
pillar was erected: unless we suppose he raised this pillar before they
were born.
And Achimaas the son of Sadoc said: I will run and tell the king,
that the Lord hath done judgment for him from the hand of his enemies.
And Joab said to him: Thou shalt not be the messenger this day,
but shalt bear tidings another day: this day I will not have thee bear
tidings, because the king's son is dead.
And Joab said to Chusai: Go, and tell the king what thou hast
seen. Chusai bowed down to Joab, and ran.
Then Achimaas the son of Sadoc said to Joab again: Why might not
son? thou wilt not be the bearer of good tidings.
He answered: But what if I run? And he said to him: Run. Then
And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman that was on
the top of the gate upon the wall, lifting up his eyes, saw a man
running alone.
And crying out he told the king: and the king said: If he be
alone, there are good tidings in his mouth. And as he was coming apace,
and drawing nearer,
The watchman saw another man running, and crying aloud from
above, he said: I see another man running alone. And the king said: He
also is a good messenger.
And the watchman said: The running of the foremost seemeth to me
like the running of Achimaas the son of Sadoc. And the king said: He is
a good man: and cometh with good news.
And Achimaas crying out, said to the king: God save thee, O king.
up their hands against the lord my king.
And the king said: Is the young man Absalom safe? And Achimaas
said: I saw a great tumult, O king, when thy servant Joab sent me thy
servant: I know nothing else.
And the king said to him: Pass, and stand here.
And when he had passed, and stood still, Chusai appeared and
coming up he said: I bring good tidings, my lord, the king, for the Lord
hath judged for thee this day from the hand of all that have risen up
against thee.
And the king said to Chusai: Is the young man Absalom safe? And
all that rise against him unto evil, be as the young man is.
The king therefore being much moved, went up to the high chamber
over the gate, and wept. And as he went he spoke in this manner: My son
my son, my son Absalom.
wretched state in which he died: and therefore would have been glad to
have saved his life, even by dying for him. In which he was a figure of
for them that crucified him.
back and met by Semei and Miphiboseth: a strife between the men of Juda
and the men of Israel.
And it was told Joab, that the king wept and mourned for his son:
And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people: for the people heard say that day: The king grieveth for his
son.
And the people shunned the going into the city that day as a
people would do that hath turned their backs, and fled away from the
battle.
And the king covered his head, and cried with a loud voice: O my
son Absalom, O Absalom my son, O my son.
Then Joab going into the house to the king, said: Thou hast shamed
this day the faces of all thy servants, that have saved thy life, and
the lives of thy sons, and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives,
and the lives of thy concubines.
Thou lovest them that hate thee, and thou hatest them that love
thee: and thou hast shewn this day that thou carest not for thy nobles,
nor for thy servants: and I now plainly perceive that if Absalom had
lived, and all we had been slain, then it would have pleased thee.
Now therefore arise, and go out, and speak to the satisfaction of
thy servants: for I swear to thee by the Lord, that if thou wilt not go
forth, there will not tarry with thee so much as one this night: and
that will be worse to thee, than all the evils that have befallen thee
from thy youth until now.
Then the king arose and sat in the gate: and it was told to all
the people that the king sat in the gate: and all the people came before
the king, but Israel fled to their own dwellings.
And all the people were at strife in all the tribes of Israel,
saying: The king delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, and he
saved us out of the hand of the Philistines: and now he is fled out of
the land for Absalom.
But Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in the battle: how
long are you silent, and bring not back the king?
And king David sent to Sadoc, and Abiathar the priests, saying:
king back to his house? (For the talk of all Israel was come to the king
in his house.)
You are my brethren, you are my bone, and my flesh, why are you
the last to bring back the king?
And say ye to Amasa: Art not thou my bone, and my flesh? So do
before me always in the place of Joab.
And he inclined the heart of all the men of Juda, as it were of
one man: and they sent to the king, saying: Return thou, and all thy
servants.
And the king returned and came as far as the Jordan, and all Juda
came as far as Galgal to meet the king, and to bring him over the
And Semei the son of Gera the son of Jemini of Bahurim, made
haste and went down with the men of Juda to meet king David,
With a thousand men of Benjamin, and Siba the servant of the
house of Saul: and his fifteen sons, and twenty servants were with him:
and going over the Jordan,
They passed the fords before the king, that they might help over
the king's household, and do according to his commandment. And Semei the
son of Gera falling down before the king, when he was come over the
Said to him: Impute not to me, my lord, the iniquity, nor
remember the injuries of thy servant on the day that thou, my lord, the
king, wentest out of Jerusalem, nor lay it up in thy heart, O king.
For I thy servant acknowledge my sin: and therefore I am come
this day the first of all the house of Joseph, and am come down to meet
my lord the king.
But Abisai the son of Sarvia answering, said: Shall Semei for
these words not be put to death, because he cursed the Lord's anointed?
And David said: What have I to do with you, ye sons of Sarvia?
why are you a satan this day to me? shall there any man be killed this
day in Israel? do not I know that this day I am made king over Israel?
And the king said to Semei: Thou shalt not die. And he swore unto
him.
And Miphiboseth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and
he had neither washed his feet, nor trimmed his beard: nor washed his
garments from the day that the king went out, until the day of his
return in peace.
And when he met the king at Jerusalem, the king said to him: Why
camest thou not with me, Miphiboseth?
And he answering, said: My lord, O king, my servant despised me:
for I thy servant spoke to him to saddle me an ass, that I might get on
and go with the king: for I thy servant am lame.
Moreover he hath also accused me thy servant to thee, my lord the
king: but thou my lord the king art as an angel of God, do what pleaseth
thee.
For all of my father's house were no better than worthy of death
before my lord the king; and thou hast set me thy servant among the
guests of thy table: what just complaint therefore have I? or what right
to cry any more to the king?
Then the king said to him: Why speakest thou any more? what I
have said is determined: thou and Siba divide the possessions.
And Miphiboseth answered the king: Yea, let him take all,
forasmuch as my lord the king is returned peaceably into his house.
Berzellai also the Galaadite coming down from Rogelim, brought
the king over the Jordan, being ready also to wait on him beyond the
river.
Now Berzellai the Galaadite was of a great age, that is to say,
fourscore years old, and he provided the king with sustenance when he
abode in the camp: for he was a man exceeding rich.
And the king said to Berzellai: Come with me that thou mayest
rest secure with me in Jerusalem.
And Berzellai said to the king: How many are the days of the
years of my life, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?
I am this day fourscore years old, are my senses quick to discern
sweet and bitter? or can meat or drink delight thy servant? or can I
hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? why should thy
servant be a burden to my lord, the king?
I thy servant will go on a little way from the Jordan with thee:
But I beseech thee let thy servant return, and die in my own
city, and be buried by the sepulchre of my father, and of my mother. But
there is thy servant Chamaam, let him go with thee, my lord, the king,
and do to him whatsoever seemeth good to thee.
Then the king said to him: Let Chamaam go over with me, and I
will do for him whatsoever shall please thee, and all that thou shalt
ask of me, thou shalt obtain.
And when all the people and the king had passed over the Jordan,
the king kissed Berzellai, and blessed him: and he returned to his own
place.
So the king went on to Galgal, and Chamaam with him. Now all the
people of Juda had brought the king over, and only half of the people of
Therefore all the men of Israel running together to the king,
said to him: Why have our brethren the men of Juda stolen thee away, and
have brought the king and his household over the Jordan, and all the men
of David with him?
And all the men of Juda answered the men of Israel: Because the
king is nearer to me: why art thou angry for this matter? have we eaten
any thing of the king's, or have any gifts been given us?
And the men of Israel answered the men of Juda, and said: I have
ten parts in the king more than thou, and David belongeth to me more
than to thee: why hast thou done me a wrong, and why was it not told me
first, that I might bring back my king? And the men of Juda answered
more harshly than the men of Israel.
the citizens casting over the wall the head of Seba, Joab departeth with
all his army.
And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was
and said: We have no part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Isai:
return to thy dwellings, O Israel.
And all Israel departed from David, and followed Seba the son of
And when the king was come into his house at Jerusalem, he took
the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and
put them inward, allowing them provisions: and he went not in unto them,
but they were shut up unto the day of their death living in widowhood.
And the king said to Amasa: Assemble to me all the men of Juda
against the third day, and be thou here present.
So Amasa went to assemble the men of Juda, but he tarried beyond
the set time which the king had appointed him.
And David said to Abisai: Now will Seba the son of Bochri do us
more harm than did Absalom: take thou therefore the servants of thy
lord, and pursue after him, lest he find fenced cities, and escape us.
So Joab's men went out with him, and the Cerethi and the Phelethi:
and all the valiant men went out of Jerusalem to pursue after Seba the
son of Bochri.
And when they were at the great stone which is in Gabaon, Amasa
coming met them. And Joab had on a close coat of equal length with his
habit, and over it was girded with a sword hanging down to his flank, in
a scabbard, made in such manner as to come out with the least motion and
strike.
And Joab said to Amasa: God save thee, my brother. And he took
But Amasa did not take notice of the sword, which Joab had, and
he struck him in the side, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and
gave him not a second wound, and he died. And Joab, and Abisai his
brother pursued after Seba the son of Bochri.
In the mean time some men of Joab's company stopping at the dead
body of Amasa, said: Behold he that would have been in Joab's stead the
companion of David.
And Amasa imbrued with blood, lay in the midst of the way. A
certain man saw this that all the people stood still to look upon him,
so he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and covered him
with a garment, that they who passed might, not stop on his account.
And when he was removed out of the way, all the people went on
following Joab to pursue after Seba the son of Bochri.
Now he had passed through all the tribes of Israel unto Abela and
And they came, and besieged him in Abela, and in Bethmaacha, and
they cast up works round the city, and the city was besieged: and all
the people that were with Joab, laboured to throw down the walls.
And a wise woman cried out from the city: Hear, hear, and say to
And when he was come near to her, she said to him: Art thou Joab?
handmaid. He answered: I do hear.
And she again said: A saying was used in the old proverb: They
that inquire, let them inquire in Abela: and so they made an end.
Am not I she that answer truth in Israel, and thou seekest to
destroy the city, and to overthrow a mother in Israel? Why wilt thou
throw down the inheritance of the Lord?
And Joab answering said: God forbid, God forbid that I should, I
do not throw down, nor destroy.
The matter is not so, but a man of mount Ephraim, Seba the son of
only, and we will depart from the city. And the woman said to Joab:
So she went to all the people, and spoke to them wisely: and they
cut off the head of Seba the son of Bochri, and cast it out to Joab. And
he sounded the trumpet, and they departed from the city, every one to
their home: and Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.
So Joab was over all the army of Israel: and Banaias the son of
But Aduram over the tributes: and Josaphat the son of Ahilud was
recorder.
And Siva was scribe: and Sadoc and Abiathar, priests.
And Ira the Jairite was the priest of David.
whose desire seven of Saul's race are crucified. War again with the
And there was a famine in the days of David for three years
successively: and David consulted the oracle of the Lord. And the Lord
said: It is for Saul, and his bloody house, because he slow the
Then the king, calling for the Gabaonites, said to them: (Now the
sought to slay them out of zeal, as it were for the children of Israel
and Juda:)
David therefore said to the Gabaonites: What shall I do for you?
and what shall be the atonement or you, that you may bless the
inheritance of the Lord?
And the Gabaonites said to him: We have no contest about silver
and gold, but against Saul and against his house: neither do we desire
that any man be slain of Israel. And the king said to them: What will
you then that I should do for you?
And they said to the king: The man that crushed us and oppressed
us unjustly, we must destroy in such manner that there be not so much as
one left of his stock in all the coasts of Israel.
Let seven men of his children be delivered unto us, that we may
crucify them to the Lord in Gabaa of Saul, once the chosen of the Lord.
And the king spared Miphiboseth the son of Jonathan the son of
So the king took the two sons of Respha the daughter of Aia, whom
she bore to Saul, Armoni, and Miphiboseth: and the five sons of Michol
the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Hadriel the son of Berzellai,
that was of Molathi:
but they are here called the sons of Michol, because she adopted them,
and brought them up as her own.
And gave them into the hands of the Gabaonites: and they crucified
them on a hill before the Lord: and these seven died together in the
first days of the harvest, when the barley began to be reaped.
And Respha the daughter of Aia took haircloth, and spread it
under her upon the rock from the beginning of the harvest, till water
dropped upon them out of heaven: and suffered neither the birds to tear
them by day, nor the beasts by night.
And it was told David, what Respha the daughter of Aia, the
concubine of Saul, had done.
And David went, and took the bones of Saul, and the bones of
the street of Bethsan, where the Philistines had hanged them when they
had slain Saul in Gelboe.
And he brought from thence the bones of Saul, and the bones of
crucified,
And they buried them with the bones of Saul, and of Jonathan his
son in the land of Benjamin, in the side, in the sepulchre of Cis his
father: and they did all that the king had commanded, and God shewed
mercy again to the land after these things.
And the Philistines made war again against Israel, and David went
down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines. And
Jesbibenob, who was of the race of Arapha, the iron of whose
spear weighed three hundred ounces, being girded with a new sword,
attempted to kill David.
And Abisai the son of Sarvia rescued him, and striking the
shalt go no more out with us to battle, lest thou put out the lamp of
There was also a second battle in Gob against the Philistines:
then Sobochai of Husathi slew Saph of the race of Arapha of the family
of the giants.
And there was a third battle in Gob against the Philistines, in
which Adeodatus the son of the Forrest an embroiderer of Bethlehem slew
A fourth battle was in Geth: where there was a man of great
stature, that had six fingers on each hand, and six toes on each foot,
four and twenty in all, and he was of the race of Arapha.
And he reproached Israel: and Jonathan the son of Samae the
brother of David slew him.
These four were born of Arapha in Geth, and they fell by the hand
of David, and of his servants.
enemies.
And David spoke to the Lord the words of this canticle, in the day
that the Lord delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out
of the hand of Saul,
And he said: The Lord is my rock, and my strength, and my saviour.
God is my strong one, in him will I trust: my shield, and the horn
of my salvation: he lifteth me up, and is my refuge: my saviour, thou
wilt deliver me from iniquity.
I will call on the Lord who is worthy to be praised: and I shall
be saved from my enemies.
For the pangs of death have surrounded me: the floods of Belial
have made me afraid.
The cords of hell compassed me: the snares of death prevented me.
In my distress I will call upon the Lord, and I will cry to my
to his ears.
The earth shook and trembled, the foundations of the mountains
were moved, and shaken, because he was angry with them.
A smoke went up from his nostrils, and a devouring fire out of his
mouth: coals were kindled by it.
He bowed the heavens, and came down: and darkness was under his
feet.
And he rode upon the cherubims, and flew: and slid upon the wings
of the wind.
He made darkness a covering round about him: dropping waters out
of the clouds of the heavens.
By the brightness before him, the coals of fire were kindled.
The Lord shall thunder from heaven: and the most high shall give
forth his voice.
He shot arrows and scattered them: lightning, and consumed them.
And the overflowings of the sea appeared, and the foundations of
the world were laid open at the rebuke of the Lord, at the blast of the
spirit of his wrath.
He sent from on high, and took me, and drew me out of many
waters.
He delivered me from my most mighty enemy, and from them that
hated me: for they were too strong for me.
He prevented me in the day of my affliction, and the Lord became
my stay.
And he brought me forth into a large place, he delivered me,
because I pleased him.
The Lord will reward me according to my justice: and according to
the cleanness of my hands he will render to me.
Because I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God.
For all his judgments are in my sight: and his precepts I have
not removed from me.
And I shall be perfect with him: and shall keep myself from my
iniquity.
And the Lord will recompense me according to my justice: and
according to the cleanness of my hands in the sight of his eyes.
With the holy one thou wilt be holy: and with the valiant
perfect.
With the elect thou wilt be elect: and with the perverse thou
wilt be perverted.
And the poor people thou wilt save: and with thy eyes thou shalt
humble the haughty.
For thou art my lamp O Lord: and thou, O Lord, wilt enlighten my
darkness.
For in thee I will run girded: in my God I will leap over the
wall.
God, his way is immaculate, the word of the Lord is tried by
fire: he is the shield of all that trust in him.
Who is God but the Lord: and who is strong but our God?
God who hath girded me with strength, and made my way perfect.
Making my feet like the feet of harts, and setting me upon my
high places.
He teacheth my hands to war: and maketh my arms like a bow of
brass.
Thou hast given me the shield of my salvation: and thy mildness
hath multiplied me.
Thou shalt enlarge my steps under me: and my ankles shall not
fail.
I will pursue after my enemies, and crush them: and will not
return again till I consume them.
I will consume them and break them in pieces, so that they shall
not rise: they shall fall under my feet.
Thou hast girded me with strength to battle: thou hast made them
that resisted me to bow under me.
My enemies thou hast made to turn their back to me: them that
hated me, and I shall destroy them.
They shall cry, and there shall be none to save: to the Lord, and
he shall not hear them.
I shall beat them as small as the dust of the earth: I shall
crush them and spread them abroad like the mire of the streets.
Thou wilt save me from the contradictions of my people: thou wilt
keep me to be the head of the Gentiles: the people which I know not,
shall serve me,
The sons of the stranger will resist me, at the hearing of the
ear they will obey me.
The strangers are melted away, and shall be straitened in their
distresses.
The Lord liveth, and my God is blessed: and the strong God of my
salvation shall be exalted:
God who giveth me revenge, and bringest down people under me,
Who bringest me forth from my enemies, and liftest me up from
them that resist me: from the wicked man thou shalt deliver me.
Therefore will I give thanks to thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles,
and will sing to thy name.
Giving great salvation to his king, and shewing mercy to David
his anointed, and to his seed for ever.
Now these are David's last words. David the son of Isai said: The
man to whom it was appointed concerning the Christ of the God of Jacob,
the excellent psalmist of Israel said:
The spirit of the Lord hath spoken by me and his word by my
tongue.
The God of Israel said to me, the strong one of Israel spoke, the
ruler of men, the just ruler in the fear of God.
As the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, shineth in the
morning without clouds, and as the grass springeth out of the earth by
rain.
Neither is my house so great with God, that he should make with me
an eternal covenant, firm in all things and assured. For he is all my
salvation, and all my will: neither is there ought thereof that
springeth not up.
covenant was not due to my house: but purely owing to his bounty; who is
all my salvation, and my will: that is, who hath always saved me, and
granted me what I beseeched of him; so that I and my house, through his
blessing, have sprung up, and succeeded in all things.
But transgressors shall all of them be plucked up as thorns: which
are not taken away with hands.
And if a man will touch them, he must be armed with iron and with
the staff of a lance: but they shall be set on fire and burnt to
nothing.
These are the names of the valiant men of David: Jesbaham sitting
in the chair was the wisest chief among the three, he was like the most
tender little worm of the wood, who killed eight hundred men at one
onset.
appears from 1 Chron. or Paralip. 11.-Ibid. Most tender, etc... He
appeared like one tender and weak, but was indeed most valiant and
strong. It seems the Latin has here given the interpretation of the
itself, which was Adino the Eznite, one much renowned of old for his
valour.
After him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the
three valiant men that were with David when they defied the Philistines,
and they were there gathered together to battle.
name Dodo. The same occurs in ver. 24.
And when the men of Israel were gone away, he stood and smote the
the Lord wrought a great victory that day: and the people that were fled
away, returned to take spoils of them that were slain.
And after him was Semma the son of Age of Arari. And the
full of lentils. And when the people were fled from the face of the
He stood in the midst of the field, and defended it, and defeated
the Philistines: and the Lord gave a great victory.
Moreover also before this the three who were princes among the
thirty, went down and came to David in the harvest time into the cave of
giants.
And David was then in a hold: and there was a garrison of the
And David longed, and said: O that some man would get me a drink
of the water out of the cistern, that is in Bethlehem, by the gate.
And the three valiant men broke through the camp of the
the gate, and brought it to David: but he would not drink, but offered
it to the Lord,
Saying: The Lord be merciful to me, that I may not do this: shall
therefore he would not drink. These things did these three mighty men.
Abisai also the brother of Joab, the son of Sarvia, was chief
among three: and he lifted up his spear against three hundred whom he
slew, and he was renowned among the three,
And the noblest of three, and was their chief, but to the three
first he attained not.
And Banaias the son of Joiada a most valiant man, of great deeds,
of Cabseel: he slew the two lions of Moab, and he went down, and slew a
lion in the midst of a pit, in the time of snow.
He also slew an Egyptian, a man worthy to be a sight, having a
spear in his hand: but he went down to him with a rod, and forced the
spear out of the hand of the Egyptian, and slew him with his own spear.
These things did Banaias the son of Joiada.
And he was renowned among the three valiant men, who were the
most honourable among the thirty: but he attained not to the first
three: and David made him of his privy council.
Asael the brother of Joab was one of the thirty, Elehanan the son
of Dodo of Bethlehem.
Semma of Harodi, Elica of Harodi,
Heles of Phalti, Hira the son of Acces of Thecua,
Abiezer of Anathoth, Mobonnai of Husati,
Selmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,
Heled the son of Baana, also a Netophathite, Ithai the son of
Banaia the Pharathonite, Heddai of the torrent Gaas,
Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth of Beromi,
Eliaba of Salaboni. The sons of Jassen, Jonathan,
Semma of Orori, Aliam the son of Sarar the Arorite,
Eliphelet the son of Aasbai the son of Machati, Eliam the son of
Hesrai of Carmel, Pharai of Arbi,
Igaal the son of Nathan of Soba, Bonni of Gadi,
Selec of Ammoni, Naharai the Berothite, armourbearer of Joab the
son of Sarvia,
Ira the Jethrite, Gareb also a Jethrite;
Urias the Hethite, thirty and seven in all.
And the anger of the Lord was again kindled against Israel, and
stirred up David among them, saying: Go, number Israel and Juda.
And the king said to Joab the general of his army: Go through all
the tribes of Israel from Dan to Bersabee, and number ye the people that
And Joab said to the king: The Lord thy God increase thy people,
and make them as many more as they are now, and again multiply them a
hundredfold in the sight of my lord the king: but what meaneth my lord
the king by this kind of thing?
But the king's words prevailed over the words of Joab, and of the
captains of the army: and Joab, and the captains of the soldiers went
out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.
And when they had passed the Jordan, they came to Aroer to the
right side of the city, which is in the vale of Gad.
And by Jazer they passed into Galaad, and to the lower land of
They passed near the walls of Tyre, and all the land of the
And having gone through the whole land, after nine months and
twenty days, they came to Jerusalem.
And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people to the king,
and there were found of Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that
drew the sword: and of Juda five hundred thousand fighting men.
But David's heart struck him, after the people were numbered: and
have done exceeding foolishly.
was touched with a great remorse for the vanity and pride which had put
him upon numbering the people.
And David arose in the morning, and the word of the Lord came to
Go, and say to David: Thus saith the Lord: I give thee thy choice
of three things, choose one of them which thou wilt, that I may do it to
thee.
And when Gad was come to David, he told him, saying: Either seven
years of famine shall come to thee in thy land: or thou shalt flee three
months before thy adversaries, and they shall pursue thee: or for three
days there shall be a pestilence in thy land. Now therefore deliberate,
and see what answer I shall return to him that sent me.
And David said to Gad: I am in a great strait: but it is better
that I should fall into the hands of the Lord (for his mercies are many)
than into the hands of men.
And the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel, from the morning unto
the time appointed, and there died of the people from Dan to Bersabee
seventy thousand men.
And when the angel of the Lord had stretched out his hand over
to the angel that slew the people: It is enough: now hold thy hand. And
the angel of the Lord was by the thrashingfloor of Areuna the Jebusite.
And David said to the Lord, when he saw the angel striking the
people: It is I; I am he that have sinned, I have done wickedly: these
that are the sheep, what have they done? let thy hand, I beseech thee,
be turned against me, and against my father's house.
And Gad came to David that day, and said: Go up, and build an
altar to the Lord in the thrashingfloor of Areuna the Jebusite.
And David went up according to the word of Gad which the Lord had
commanded him.
And Areuna looked, and saw the king and his servants coming
towards him:
And going out he worshipped the king, bowing with his face to the
earth, and said: Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant? And
to the Lord, that the plague, which rageth among the people, may cease.
And Areuna said to David: Let my lord the king take, and offer,
as it seemeth good to him: thou hast here oxen for a holocaust, and the
wain, and the yokes of the oxen for wood.
All these things Areuna as a king gave to the king: and Areuna
said to the king: The Lord thy God receive thy vow.
And the king answered him, and said: Nay, but I will buy it of
thee, at a price, and I will not offer to the Lord my God holocausts
free cost. So David bought the floor, and the oxen, for fifty sicles of
silver:
And David built there an altar to the Lord, and offered
holocausts and peace offerings: and the Lord became merciful to the
land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.
fourth book of Kings; but by the Hebrews, the first and second. They
contain the history of the kingdoms of Israel and Juda, from the
beginning of the reign of Solomon, to the captivity. As to the writer of
these books, it seems most probable they were not written by one man;
nor at one time; but as there was all along a succession of prophets in
that happened in their days, these books seem to have been written by
these prophets. See 2 Paralip. alias 2 Chron. 9.29; 12.15; 13.22; 20.34;
26.22; 32.32.
pretending to reign, Nathan and Bethsabee obtain that Solomon should be
declared and anointed king.
Now king David was old, and advanced in years: and when he was
covered with clothes he was not warm.
His servants therefore, said to him: Let us seek for our Lord the
king, a young virgin, and let her stand before the king, and cherish
him, and sleep in his bosom and warm our lord the king.
So they sought a beautiful young woman, in all the coasts of Israel
and they found Abisag, a Sunamitess, and brought her to the king.
And the damsel was exceedingly beautiful, and she slept with the
king, and served him, but the king did not know her.
And Adonias, the son of Haggith, exalted himself, saying: I will be
king.  And he made himself chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run
before him.
Neither did his father rebuke him at any time, saying: Why hast
thou done this?  And he also was very beautiful, the next in birth after
And he conferred with Joab, the son of Sarvia, and with Abiathar,
the priest, who furthered Adonias's side.
But Sadoc, the priest, and Banaias, the son of Joiada, and Nathan,
the prophet, and Semei, and Rei, and the strength of David's army, was
not with Adonias.
And Adonias having slain rams and calves, and all fat cattle, by
the stone of Zoheleth, which was near the fountain Rogel, invited all
his brethren, the king's sons, and all the men of Juda, the king's
servants:
But Nathan, the prophet, and Banaias, and all the valiant men, and
And Nathan said to Bethsabee, the mother of Solomon: Hast thou not
heard that Adonias, the son of Haggith, reigneth, and our lord David
knoweth it not?
Now then, come, take my counsel, and save thy life, and the life
of thy son Solomon.
Go, and get thee in to king David, and say to him: Didst not thou,
my lord, O king, swear to me, thy handmaid, saying: Solomon, thy son,
shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne? why then doth
And while thou art yet speaking there with the king, I will come
in after thee, and will fill up thy words.
So Bethsabee went in to the king into the chamber. Now the king
was very old, and Abisag, the Sunamitess, ministered to him.
Bethsabee bowed herself, and worshipped the king. And the king
said to her: What is thy will?
She answered, and said: My lord, thou didst swear to thy handmaid,
by the Lord thy God, saying: Solomon, thy son, shall reign after me, and
he shall sit on my throne.
And behold, now Adonias reigneth, and thou, my lord the king,
knowest nothing of it.
He hath killed oxen, and all fat cattle, and many rams, and
invited all the king's sons, and Abiathar, the priest, and Joab, the
general of the army: but Solomon, thy servant, he invited not.
And now, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee,
that thou shouldst tell them, who shall sit on thy throne, my lord the
king, after thee.
Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king sleepeth
with his fathers, that I, and my son, Solomon, shall be accounted
offenders.
As she was yet speaking with the king, Nathan, the prophet, came.
And they told the king, saying: Nathan, the prophet, is here. And
when he was come in before the king, and had worshipped, bowing down to
the ground,
Nathan said: My lord, O king, hast thou said: Let Adonias reign
after me, and let him sit upon my throne?
Because he is gone down to day, and hath killed oxen, and
fatlings, and many rams, and invited all the king's sons, and the
captains of the army, and Abiathar the priest: and they are eating and
drinking before him, and saying: God save king Adonias:
But me, thy servant, and Sadoc, the priest, and Banaias, the son
of Joiada, and Solomon, thy servant, he hath not invited.
Is this word come out from my lord the king, and hast thou not
told me, thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
after him?
And king David answered, and said: Call to me Bethsabee. And when
she was come in to the king, and stood before him,
The king swore, and said: As the Lord liveth, who hath delivered
my soul out of all distress,
Even as I swore to thee, by the Lord, the God of Israel, saying:
in my stead, so will I do this day.
And Bethsabee, bowing with her face to the earth, worshipped the
king, saying: May my lord David live for ever.
King David also said: Call me Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the
prophet, and Banaias, the son of Joiada.  And when they were come in
before the king,
He said to them: Take with you the servants of your lord, and set
my son Solomon upon my mule: and bring him to Gihon:
And let Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, anoint him
there king over Israel: and you shall sound the trumpet, and shall say:
And you shall come up after him, and he shall come, and shall sit
upon my throne, and he shall reign in my stead: and I will appoint him
to be ruler over Israel, and over Juda.
And Banaias, the son of Joiada, answered the king, saying: Amen:
so say the Lord, the God of my lord the king.
As the Lord hath been with my lord the king, so be he with
So Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, went down, and
And Sadoc, the priest, took a horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anointed Solomon: and they sounded the trumpet, and all the people
said: God save king Solomon.
And all the multitude went up after him, and the people played
with pipes, and rejoiced with a great joy, and the earth rang with the
noise of their cry.
And Adonias, and all that were invited by him, heard it, and now
the feast was at an end. Joab also, hearing the sound of the trumpet,
said: What meaneth this noise of the city in an uproar?
While he yet spoke, Jonathan, the son of Abiathar, the priest,
came: and Adonias said to him: Come in, because thou art a valiant man,
and bringest good news.
And Jonathan answered Adonias: Not so: for our lord, king David,
hath appointed Solomon king;
And hath sent with him Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet,
and Banaias, the son of Joiada, and the Cerethi, and the Phelethi, and
they have set him upon the king's mule:
And Sadoc, the priest, and Nathan, the prophet, have anointed him
king, in Gihon: and they are gone up from thence rejoicing, so that the
city rang again: this is the noise that you have heard.
Moreover, Solomon sitteth upon the throne of the kingdom.
And the king's servants going in, have blessed our lord king
and make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king adored in his
bed:
And he said: Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who hath
given this day one to sit on my throne, my eyes seeing it.
Then all the guests of Adonias were afraid, and they all arose,
and every man went his way.
And Adonias fearing Solomon, arose and went, and took hold of the
horn of the altar.
And they told Solomon, saying: Behold Adonias fearing king
sword.
And Solomon said: If he be a good man, there shall not so much as
one hair of his head fall to the ground: but if evil be found in him, he
shall die.
Then king Solomon sent, and brought him out from the altar: and
going in, he worshipped king Solomon: and Solomon said to him: Go to thy
house.
death: Abiathar is banished: Joab and Semei are slain.
And the days of David drew nigh that he should die, and he charged
his son Solomon, saying:
I am going the way of all flesh: take thou courage and shew thyself
a man.
And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and
observe his ceremonies, and his precepts, and judgments, and
testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses: that thou mayst
understand all thou dost, and whithersoever thou shalt turn thyself:
That the Lord may confirm his words, which he hath spoken of me,
saying: If thy children shall take heed to their ways, and shall walk
before me in truth, with all their heart, and with all their soul, there
shall not be taken away from thee a man on the throne of Israel.
Thou knowest also what Joab, the son of Sarvia, hath done to me,
what he did to the two captains of the army of Israel, to Abner, the son
of Ner, and to Amasa, the son of Jether: whom he slew, and shed the
blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war on his girdle that was
about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet.
pique; but from a zeal for justice, that crimes so public and heinous
might not pass unpunished.
Do, therefore, according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoary head
go down to hell in peace.
damnation; but the place and state of the dead.
But shew kindness to the sons of Berzellai, the Galaadite, and let
them eat at thy table: for they met me when I fled from the face of
Thou hast also with thee Semei, the son of Gera, the son of Jemini,
of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse, when I went to the
camp: but because he came down to meet me when I passed over the Jordan,
and I swore to him by the Lord, saying: I will not kill thee with the
sword:
Do not thou hold him guiltless. But thou art a wise man, and
knowest what to do with him, and thou shalt bring down his grey hairs
with blood to the grave.
So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
And the days that David reigned in Israel, were forty years: in
And Solomon sat upon the throne of his father David, and his
kingdom was strengthened exceedingly.
And Adonias, the son of Haggith, came to Bethsabee the mother of
is peaceable.
And he added: I have a word to speak with thee. She said to him:
Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and all Israel had
preferred me to be their king: but the kingdom is transferred, and is
become my brother's: for it was appointed him by the Lord.
Now therefore, I ask one petition of thee; turn not away my face.
And he said I pray thee speak to king Solomon (for he cannot deny
thee any thing) to give me Abisag, the Sunamitess, to wife.
And Bethsabee said: Well, I will speak for thee to the king.
Then Bethsabee came to king Solomon, to speak to him for Adonias:
and the king arose to meet her, and bowed to her, and sat down upon his
throne: and a throne was set for the king's mother, and she sat on his
right hand.
And she said to him: I desire one small petition of thee; do not
put me to confusion. And the king said to her: My mother ask, for I must
not turn away thy face.
And she said: Let Abisag, the Sunamitess, be given to Adonias, thy
brother, to wife.
And king Solomon answered, and said to his mother: Why dost thou
ask Abisag, the Sunamitess, for Adonias? ask for him also the kingdom;
for he is my elder brother, and hath Abiathar, the priest, and Joab, the
son of Sarvia.
Then king Solomon swore by the Lord, saying: So and so may God do
to me, and add more, if Adonias hath not spoken this word against his
own life.
And now, as the Lord liveth, who hath established me, and placed
me upon the throne of David, my father, and who hath made me a house, as
he promised, Adonias shall be put to death this day.
And king Solomon sent by the hand of Banaias, the son of Joiada,
who slew him, and he died.
And the king said also to Abiathar, the priest: Go to Anathoth, to
thy lands, for indeed thou art worthy of death: but I will not at this
time put thee to death, because thou didst carry the ark of the Lord God
before David, my father, and hast endured trouble in all the troubles my
father endured.
So Solomon cast out Abiathar from being the priest of the Lord,
that the word of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he spoke concerning
the house of Heli in Silo.
And the news came to Joab, because Joab had turned after Adonias,
and had not turned after Solomon: and Joab fled into the tabernacle of
the Lord, and took hold on the horn of the altar.
And it was told king Solomon, that Joab was fled into the
tabernacle of the Lord, and was by the altar: and Solomon sent Banaias,
the son of Joiada, saying. Go, kill him.
And Banaias came to the tabernacle of the Lord, and said to him:
here I will die. Banaias brought word back to the king, saying: Thus
saith Joab, and thus he answered me.
And the king said to him: Do as he hath said; and kill him, and
bury him, and thou shalt remove the innocent blood which hath been shed
by Joab, from me, and from the house of my father:
And the Lord shall return his blood upon his own head; because he
murdered two men, just and better than himself: and slew them with the
sword, my father, David, not knowing it; Abner, the son of Ner, general
of the army of Israel, and Amasa, the son of Jether general of the army
of Juda;
And their blood shall return upon the head of Joab, and upon the
head of his seed for ever. But to David and his seed, and his house, and
to his throne, be peace for ever from the Lord.
So Banaias, the son of Joiada, went up, and setting upon him slew
him, and he was buried in his house in the desert.
And the king appointed Banaias, the son of Joiada in his room over
the army; and Sadoc, the priest, he put in the place of Abiathar.
The king also sent, and called for Semei, and said to him: Build
thee a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there: and go not out from thence
any where.
For on what day soever thou shalt go out, and shalt pass over the
brook Cedron, know that thou shalt be put to death: thy blood shall be
upon thy own head.
And Semei said to the king: The saying is good: as my lord the
king hath said, so will thy servant do.  And Semei dwelt in Jerusalem
many days.
And it came to pass after three years, that the servants of Semei
ran away to Achis, the son of Maacha, the king of Geth: and it was told
And Semei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Achis, to Geth,
to seek his servants, and he brought them out of Geth.
And it was told Solomon, that Semei had gone from Jerusalem to
And sending he called for him, and said to him: Did I not protest
to thee by the Lord, and tell thee before: On what day soever thou shalt
go out and walk abroad any where, know that thou shalt die?  And thou
answeredst me: The word that I have heard is good.
Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the Lord, and the
commandment that I laid upon thee?
And the king said to Semei: Thou knowest all the evil, of which
thy heart is conscious, which thou didst to David, my father: the Lord
hath returned thy wickedness upon thy own head.
And king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall
be established before the Lord for ever.
So the king commanded Banaias, the son of Joiada: and he went out
and struck him; and he died.
choice which God gave him he preferreth wisdom. His wise judgment
between the two harlots.
And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon, and he made
affinity with Pharao, the king of Egypt: for he took his daughter, and
brought her into the city of David: until he had made an end of building
his own house, and the house of the Lord, and the wall of Jerusalem
round about.
But yet the people sacrificed in the high places: for there was no
temple built to the name of the Lord until that day.
according to the ordinance of the law; which allowed of no other places
for sacrifice but the temple of God. Among these high places that of
testimony, which had been removed from Silo to Nobe and from Nobe to
And Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the precepts of David, his
father; only he sacrificed in the high places, and burnt incense.
He went therefore to Gabaon, to sacrifice there: for that was the
great high place: a thousand victims for holocausts, did Solomon offer
upon that altar, in Gabaon.
And the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night, saying: Ask
what thou wilt that I should give thee.
And Solomon said: Thou hast shewed great mercy to thy servant
and an upright heart with thee: and thou hast kept thy great mercy for
him, and hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.
And now, O Lord God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
come in;
And thy servant is in the midst of the people which thou hast
chosen, an immense people, which cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude.
Give therefore to thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy
people, and discern between good and evil. For who shall be able to
judge this people, thy people, which is so numerous?
And the word was pleasing to the Lord, that Solomon had asked such
a thing.
And the Lord said to Solomon: Because thou hast asked this thing,
and hast not asked for thyself long life nor riches, nor the lives of
thy enemies, but hast asked for thyself wisdom to discern judgment;
Behold I have done for thee according to thy words, and have given
thee a wise and understanding heart, in so much that there hath been no
one like thee before thee, nor shall arise after thee.
Yea, and the things also which thou didst not ask, I have given
thee; to wit, riches and glory: so that no one hath been like thee among
the kings in all days heretofore.
And if thou wilt walk in my ways, and keep my precepts and my
commandments, as thy father walked, I will lengthen thy days.
And Solomon awaked, and perceived that it was a dream: and when he
was come to Jerusalem, he stood before the ark of the covenant of the
and made a great feast for all his servants.
Then there came two women that were harlots, to the king, and
stood before him.
And one of them said: I beseech thee, my lord, I and this woman
dwelt in one house, and I was delivered of a child with her in the
chamber.
And the third day after I was delivered, she also was delivered;
and we were together, and no other person with us in the house; only we
two.
And this woman's child died in the night: for in her sleep she
overlaid him.
And rising in the dead time of the night, she took my child from
my side, while I, thy handmaid, was asleep, and laid it in her bosom:
and laid her dead child in my bosom.
And when I arose in the morning, to give my child suck, behold it
was dead: but considering him more diligently, when it was clear day, I
found that it was not mine which I bore.
And the other woman answered: It is not so as thou sayest, but thy
child is dead, and mine is alive. On the contrary, she said; Thou liest:
for my child liveth, and thy child is dead. And in this manner they
strove before the king.
Then said the king: The one saith, My child is alive, and thy
child is dead. And the other answereth: Nay; but thy child is dead, and
mine liveth.
The king therefore said: Bring me a sword. And when they had
brought a sword before the king,
Divide, said he, the living child in two, and give half to the one
and half to the other.
But the woman, whose child was alive, said to the king; (for her
bowels were moved upon her child) I beseech thee, my lord, give her the
child alive, and do not kill it. But the other said: Let it be neither
mine nor thine; but divide it.
The king answered, and said: Give the living child to this woman,
and let it not be killed; for she is the mother thereof.
And all Israel heard the judgment which the king had judged, and
they feared the king, seeing that the wisdom of God was in him to do
judgment.
And king Solomon reigned over all Israel:
And these were the princes which he had: Azarias, the son of Sadoc,
the priest:
Elihoreph, and Ahia, the sons of Sisa, scribes: Josaphat, the son
of Ahilud, recorder:
Banaias, the son of Joiada, over the army: and Sadoc, and Abiathar,
priests.
from the high priesthood; but only banished to his country house, and by
that means excluded from the exercise of his functions.
Azarias, the son of Nathan, over them that were about the king:
And Ahisar, governor of the house: and Adoniram, the son of Abda,
over the tribute.
And Solomon had twelve governors over all Israel, who provided
victuals for the king and for his house hold: for every one provided
necessaries, each man his month in the year.
And these are their names: Benhur, in mount Ephraim.
Bendecar, in Macces, and in Salebim, and in Bethsames, and in Elon,
and in Bethanan.
Benhesed, in Aruboth: his was Socho, and all the land of Epher.
Benabinadab, to whom belonged all Nephath-Dor: he had Tapheth, the
daughter of Solomon, to wife.
Bana, the son of Ahilud, who governed Thanac, and Mageddo, and all
Bengaber, in Ramoth Galaad: he had the town of Jair, the son of
in Basan, threescore great cities with walls, and brazen bolts.
Ahinadab, the son of Addo, was chief in Manaim.
Achimaas, in Nephthali: he also had Basemath, the daughter of
Baana, the son of Husi, in Aser, and in Baloth.
Josaphat, the son of Pharue, in Issachar.
Semei, the son of Ela, in Benjamin.
Gaber, the son of Uri, in the land of Galaad, in the land of
all that were in that land.
Juda and Israel were innumerable, as the sand of the sea in
multitude; eating and drinking, and rejoicing.
And Solomon had under him all the kingdoms, from the river to the
land of the Philistines, even to the border of Egypt: and they brought
him presents, and served him all the days of his life.
And the provision of Solomon, for each day, was thirty measures of
fine flour, and threescore measures of meal;
Ten fat oxen, and twenty out of the pastures, and a hundred rams;
besides venison of harts, roes, and buffles, and fatted fowls.
For he had all the country which was beyond the river, from
on every side round about.
And Juda, and Israel, dwelt without any fear, every one under his
vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan to Bersabee, all the days of
And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of chariot horses, and
twelve thousand for the saddle.
And the foresaid governors of the king fed them; and they
furnished the necessaries also for king Solomon's table, with great
care, in their time.
They brought barley also, and straw for the horses and beasts, to
the place where the king was, according as it was appointed them.
And God gave to Solomon wisdom, and understanding exceeding much,
and largeness of heart, as the sand that is on the sea shore.
And the wisdom of Solomon surpassed the wisdom of all the
And he was wiser than all men: wiser than Ethan, the Ezrahite, and
all nations round about.
Solomon also spoke three thousand parables: and his poems were a
thousand and five.
part of the parables extant in the book of Proverbs; and his chief poem
called the Canticle of Canticles.
And he treated about trees, from the cedar that is in Libanus,
unto the hyssop that cometh out of the wall: and he discoursed of
beasts, and of fowls, and of creeping things, and of fishes.
And they came from all nations to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
from all the kings of the earth, who heard of his wisdom.
the temple: the number of workmen and overseers.
And Hiram, king of Tyre, sent his servants to Solomon: for he heard
that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for Hiram had
always been David's friend.
Solomon sent to Hiram, saying:
Thou knowest the will of David, my father, and that he could not
build a house to the name of the Lord his God, because of the wars that
were round about him, until the Lord put them under the soles of his
feet.
But now the Lord my God hath given me rest round about; and there
is no adversary nor evil occurrence.
Wherefore I purpose to build a temple to the name of the Lord my
set upon the throne, in thy place, he shall build a house to my name.
Give orders, therefore, that thy servants cut me down cedar trees,
out of Libanus, and let my servants be with thy servants: and I will
give thee the hire of thy servants whatsoever thou wilt ask: for thou
knowest how there is not among my people a man that has skill to hew
wood like to the Sidonians.
Now when Hiram had heard the words of Solomon, he rejoiced
exceedingly, and said: Blessed be the Lord God this day, who hath given
to David a very wise son over this numerous people.
And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying: I have heard all thou hast
desired of me; and I will do all thy desire concerning cedar trees, and
fir trees.
My servants shall bring them down from Libanus to the sea: and I
will put them together in floats, on the sea, and convey them to the
place, which thou shalt signify to me, and will land them there, and
thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt allow me necessaries to furnish
food for my household.
So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees, and fir trees, according to all
his desire.
And Solomon allowed Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat, for
provision for his house, and twenty measures of the purest oil: thus
gave Solomon to Hiram every year.
And the Lord gave wisdom to Solomon, as he promised him: and there
was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and they two made a league
together.
And king Solomon chose workmen out of all Israel, and the levy was
of thirty thousand men.
And he sent them to Libanus, ten thousand every month, by turns,
so that two months they were at home: and Adoniram was over this levy.
And Solomon had seventy thousand to carry burdens, and eighty
thousand to hew stones in the mountain:
Besides the overseers who were over every work, in number three
thousand and three hundred, that ruled over the people, and them that
did the work.
And the king commanded that they should bring great stones, costly
stones, for the foundation of the temple, and should square them:
And the masons of Solomon, and the masons of Hiram, hewed them:
and the Giblians prepared timber and stones to build the house.
And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after
the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year
of the reign of Solomon over Israel, in the month Zio, (the same is the
second month) he began to build a house to the Lord.
And the house, which king Solomon built to the Lord, was threescore
cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and thirty cubits in
height.
And there was a porch before the temple, of twenty cubits in
length, according to the measure of the breadth of the temple: and it
was ten cubits in breadth, before the face of the temple.
And he made in the temple oblique windows.
And upon the wall of the temple, he built floors round about, in
the walls of the house, round about the temple and the oracle, and he
made chambers in the sides round about.
about... Chambers or cells adjoining to the temple, for the use of the
temple and of the priests, so contrived as to be between the inward and
outward wall of the temple, in three stories, one above another.-Ibid.
oracles.
The floor that was underneath was five cubits in breadth, and the
middle floor was six cubits in breadth, and the third floor was seven
cubits in breadth. And he put beams in the house round about on the
outside, that they might not be fastened in the walls of the temple.
And the house, when it was in building, was built of stones, hewed
and made ready: so that there was neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool
of iron heard in the house when it was in building.
temple in the heavenly Jerusalem, (who are the faithful,) must first be
hewn and polished here by many trials and sufferings, before they can be
admitted to have a place in that celestial structure.
The door, for the middle side, was on the right hand of the house:
and by winding stairs they went up to the middle room, and from the
middle to the third.
So he built the house, and finished it: and he covered the house
with roofs of cedar.
And he built a floor over all the house, five cubits in height,
and he covered the house with timber of cedar.
And the word of the Lord came to Solomon,
As for this house, which thou art building, if thou wilt walk in
my statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments,
walking in them, I will fulfil my word to thee, which I spoke to David
thy father.
And I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, and I
will not forsake my people Israel.
So Solomon built the house, and finished it.
And he built the walls of the house on the inside, with boards of
cedar, from the floor of the house to the top of the walls, and to the
roofs, he covered it with boards of cedar on the inside: and he covered
the floor of the house with planks of fir.
And he built up twenty cubits with boards of cedar at the hinder
part of the temple, from the floor to the top: and made the inner house
of the oracle to be the holy of holies.
And the temple itself, before the doors of the oracle, was forty
cubits long.
And all the house was covered within with cedar, having the
turnings, and the joints thereof artfully wrought, and carvings
projecting out: all was covered with boards of cedar: and no stone could
be seen in the wall at all.
And he made the oracle in the midst of the house, in the inner
part, to set there the ark of the covenant of the Lord.
Now the oracle was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in
breadth, and twenty cubits in height. And he covered it, and overlaid it
with most pure gold. And the altar also he covered with cedar.
And the house before the oracle he overlaid with most pure gold,
and fastened on the plates with nails of gold.
And there was nothing in the temple that was not covered with
gold: the whole altar of the oracle he covered also with gold.
And he made in the oracle two cherubims of olive tree, of ten
cubits in height.
One wing of the cherub was five cubits, and the other wing of the
cherub was five cubits: that is, in all ten cubits, from the extremity
of one wing to the extremity of the other wing.
The second cherub also was ten cubits: and the measure, and the
work was the same in both the cherubims:
That is to say, one cherub was ten cubits high, and in like manner
the other cherub.
And he set the cherubims in the midst of the inner temple: and the
cherubims stretched forth their wings, and the wing of the one touched
one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall: and
the other wings in the midst of the temple touched one another.
And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.
And all the walls of the temple round about he carved with divers
figures and carvings: and he made in them cherubims and palm trees, and
divers representations, as it were standing out, and coming forth from
the wall.
And the floor of the house he also overlaid with gold within and
without.
And in the entrance of the oracle, he made little doors of olive
tree, and posts of five corners,
And two doors of olive tree: and he carved upon them figures of
cherubims, and figures of palm trees, and carvings very much projecting;
and he overlaid them with gold: and he covered both the cherubims and
the palm trees, and the other things, with gold.
And he made in the entrance of the temple posts of olive tree
foursquare:
And two doors of fir tree, one of each side: and each door was
double, and so opened with folding leaves.
And he carved cherubims, and palm trees, and carved work standing
very much out: and he overlaid all with golden plates in square work by
rule.
And he built the inner court with three rows of polished stones,
and one row of beams of cedar.
In the fourth year was the house of the Lord founded, in the month
And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul.  (which is the eighth
month) the house was finished in all the works thereof, and in all the
appurtenances thereof: and he was seven years in building it.
work of the two pillars: the sea (or laver) and other vessels.
And Solomon built his own house in thirteen years, and brought it
to perfection.
He built also the house of the forest of Libanus; the length of it
was a hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty cubits, and the height
thirty cubits: and four galleries between pillars of cedar: for he had
cut cedar trees into pillars.
And he covered the whole vault with boards of cedar, and it was
held up with five and forty pillars.  And one row had fifteen pillars,
Set one against another,
And looking one upon another, with equal space between the pillars,
and over the pillars were square beams in all things equal.
And he made a porch of pillars of fifty cubits in length, and
thirty cubits in breadth: and another porch before the greater porch,
and pillars, and chapiters upon the pillars.
He made also the porch of the throne wherein is the seat of
judgment; and covered it with cedar wood from the floor to the top.
And in the midst of the porch, was a small house, where he sat in
judgment of the like work. He made also a house for the daughter of
All of costly stones, which were sawed by a certain rule and
measure, both within and without: from the foundation to the top of the
walls, and without, unto the great court.
And the foundations were of costly stones, great stones of ten
cubits or eight cubits.
And above there were costly stones of equal measure hewed, and in
like manner planks of cedar.
And the great court was made round with three rows of hewed
stones, and one row of planks of cedar, which also was observed in the
inner court of the house of the Lord, and in the porch of the house.
And king Solomon sent, and brought Hiram from Tyre,
The son of a widow woman, of the tribe of Nephthali, whose father
was a Tyrian, an artificer in brass, and full of wisdom, and
understanding, and skill to work all work in brass. And when he was come
to king Solomon, he wrought all his work.
And he cast two pillars in brass, each pillar was eighteen cubits
high: and a line of twelve cubits compassed both the pillars.
He made also two chapiters of molten brass, to be set upon the
tops of the pillars: the height of one chapiter was five cubits, and the
height of the other chapiter was five cubits:
And a kind of network, and chain work wreathed together with
wonderful art. Both the chapiters of the pillars were cast: seven rows
of nets were on one chapiter, and seven nets on the other chapiter.
And he made the pillars, and two rows round about each network to
cover the chapiters, that were upon the top, with pomegranates: and in
like manner did he to the other chapiter.
And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars, were of
lily work, in the porch of four cubits.
And again there were other chapiters on the top of the pillars
above, according to the measure of the pillar over against the network:
and of pomegranates there were two hundred, in rows round about the
other chapiter.
And he set up the two pillars in the porch of the temple: and when
he had set up the pillar on the right hand, he called the name thereof
thereof Booz.
strength. By recording these names in holy writ, the spirit of God would
have us understand the invincible firmness and strength of the pillars
on which the true temple of God, which is the church, is established.
And upon the tops of the pillars he made lily work: so the work of
the pillars was finished.
He made also a molten sea, of ten cubits, from brim to brim, round
all about; the height of it was five cubits, and a line of thirty cubits
compassed it round about.
And a graven work, under the brim of it, compassed it for ten
cubits going about the sea: there were two rows cast of chamfered
sculptures.
And it stood upon twelve oxen, of which three looked towards the
north, and three towards the west, and three towards the south, and
three towards the east: and the sea was above upon them, and their
hinder parts were all hid within.
And the laver was a hand breadth thick: and the brim thereof was
like the brim of a cup, or the leaf of a crisped lily: it contained two
thousand bates.
quantity of water which was usually put into it: but it was capable, if
brimful, of holding three thousand. See 2 Par. 4.5.
And he made ten bases of brass, every base was four cubits in
length, and four cubits in breadth, and three cubits high.
And the work itself of the bases, was intergraven: and there were
gravings between the joinings.
And between the little crowns and the ledges, were lions, and
oxen, and cherubims; and in the joinings likewise above: and under the
lions and oxen, as it were bands of brass hanging down.
And every base had four wheels, and axletrees of brass: and at the
four sides were undersetters, under the laver molten, looking one
against another.
The mouth also of the laver within, was in the top of the
chapiter: and that which appeared without, was of one cubit all round,
and together it was one cubit and a half: and in the corners of the
pillars were divers engravings: and the spaces between the pillars were
square, not round.
And the four wheels, which were at the four corners of the base,
were joined one to another under the base: the height of a wheel was a
cubit and a half.
And they were such wheels as are used to be made in a chariot: and
their axletrees, and spokes, and strakes, and naves, were all cast.
And the four undersetters, that were at every corner of each base,
were of the base itself, cast and joined together.
And on the top of the base, there was a round compass of half a
cubit, so wrought that the laver might be set thereon, having its
gravings, and divers sculptures of itself.
He engraved also in those plates, which were of brass, and in the
corners, cherubims, and lions, and palm trees, in likeness of a man
standing, so that they seemed not to be engraven, but added round about.
After this manner, he made ten bases, of one casting and measure,
and the like graving.
He made also ten lavers of brass: one laver contained four bates,
and was of four cubits: and upon every base, in all ten, he put as many
lavers.
And he set the ten bases, five on the right side of the temple,
and five on the left: and the sea he put on the right side of the
temple, over against the east southward.
And Hiram made cauldrons, and shovels, and basins, and finished
all the work of king Solomon in the temple of the Lord.
The two pillars and the two cords of the chapiters, upon the
chapiters of the pillars: and the two networks, to cover the two cords,
that were upon the top of the pillars.
And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks: two rows of
pomegranates for each network, to cover the cords of the chapiters,
which were upon the tops of the pillars.
And the ten bases, and the ten lavers on the bases.
And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea.
And the cauldrons, and the shovels, and the basins. All the
vessels that Hiram made for king Solomon, for the house of the Lord,
were of fine brass.
In the plains of the Jordan, did the king cast them in a clay
ground, between Socoth and Sartham.
And Solomon placed all the vessels: but for its exceeding great
multitude the brass could not be weighed.
And Solomon made all the vessels for the house of the Lord: the
altar of gold, and the table of gold, upon which the loaves of
proposition should be set:
And the golden candlesticks, five on the right hand, and five on
the left, over against the oracle, of pure gold: and the flowers like
lilies, and the lamps over them of gold: and golden snuffers,
And pots, and fleshhooks, and bowls, and mortars, and censers, of
most pure gold: and the hinges for the doors of the inner house of the
holy of holies, and for the doors of the house of the temple, were of
gold.
And Solomon finished all the work that he made in the house of the
the silver and the gold, and the vessels, and laid them up in the
treasures of the house of the Lord.
Then all the ancients of Israel, with the princes of the tribes,
and the heads of the families of the children of Israel, were assembled
to king Solomon, in Jerusalem: that they might carry the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, out of the city of David, that is, out of Sion.
And all Israel assembled themselves to king Solomon, on the
festival day, in the month of Ethanim, the same is the seventh month.
And all the ancients of Israel came, and the priests took up the
ark,
And carried the ark of the Lord, and the tabernacle of the
covenant, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, that were in the
tabernacle: and the priests and the Levites carried them.
And king Solomon, and all the multitude of Israel, that were
assembled unto him, went with him before the ark, and they sacrificed
sheep and oxen, that could not be counted or numbered.
And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord into
its place, into the oracle of the temple, into the holy of holies, under
the wings of the cherubims.
For the cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of the
ark, and covered the ark, and the staves thereof above.
And whereas the staves stood out, the ends of them were seen
without, in the sanctuary before the oracle, but were not seen farther
out, and there they have been unto this day.
Now in the ark there was nothing else but the two tables of stone,
which Moses put there at Horeb, when the Lord made a covenant with the
children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.
within the ark: but on the outside of the ark, or near the ark were also
the rod of Aaron, and a golden urn with manna, Heb. 9.4.
And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the
sanctuary, that a cloud filled the house of the Lord,
And the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud:
for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord.
Then Solomon said: The Lord said that he would dwell in a cloud.
Building, I have built a house for thy dwelling, to be thy most
firm throne for ever.
And the king turned his face, and blessed all the assembly of
And Solomon said: Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who spoke
with his mouth to David, my father, and with his own hands hath
accomplished it, saying:
Since the day that I brought my people Israel, out of Egypt, I
chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel, for a house to be built,
that my name might be there: but I chose David to be over my people
And David, my father, would have built a house to the name of the
And the Lord said to David, my father: Whereas, thou hast thought
in thy heart to build a house to my name, thou hast done well in having
this same thing in thy mind.
Nevertheless, thou shalt not build me a house, but thy son, that
shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build a house to my name.
The Lord hath performed his word which he spoke. And I stand in
the room of David, my father, and sit upon the throne of Israel, as the
of Israel.
And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
of the Lord, which he made with our fathers, when they came out of the
land of Egypt.
And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord, in the sight of
the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his hands towards heaven,
And said: Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven
above, or on the earth beneath: who keepest covenant and mercy with thy
servants, that have walked before thee with all their heart:
Who hast kept with thy servant David, my father, what thou hast
promised him: with thy mouth thou didst speak, and with thy hands thou
hast performed, as this day proveth.
Now, therefore, O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David,
my father, what thou hast spoken to him, saying: There shall not be
taken away of thee a man in my sight, to sit on the throne of Israel:
yet so that thy children take heed to their way, that they walk before
me as thou hast walked in my sight.
And now, Lord God of Israel, let thy words be established, which
thou hast spoken to thy servant David, my father.
Is it then to be thought that God should indeed dwell upon earth?
for if heaven, and the heavens of heavens, cannot contain thee, how much
less this house which I have built?
But have regard to the prayer of thy servant, and to his
supplications, O Lord, my God: hear the hymn and the prayer, which thy
servant prayeth before thee this day:
That thy eyes may be open upon this house, night and day: upon the
house of which thou hast said:  My name shall be there: that thou mayst
hearken to the prayer which thy servant prayeth, in this place to thee:
That thou mayst hearken to the supplication of thy servant, and of
thy people Israel, whatsoever they shall pray for in this place, and
hear them in the place of thy dwelling in heaven; and when thou hearest,
shew them mercy.
If any man trespass against his neighbour, and have an oath upon
him, wherewith he is bound, and come, because of the oath, before thy
altar, to thy house,
Then hear thou in heaven: and do and judge thy servants,
condemning the wicked, and bringing his way upon his own head, and
justifying the just, and rewarding him according to his justice.
If thy people Israel shall fly before their enemies (because they
will sin against thee) and doing penance, and confessing to thy name,
shall come and pray, and make supplications to thee in this house:
Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people
fathers.
If heaven shall be shut up, and there shall be no rain, because of
their sins, and they, praying in this place, shall do penance to thy
name, and shall be converted from their sins, by occasion of their
afflictions:
Then hear thou them in heaven, and forgive the sins of thy
servants, and of thy people Israel: and shew them the good way wherein
they should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to
thy people in possession.
If a famine arise in the land, or a pestilence, or corrupt air, or
blasting, or locust, or mildew; if their enemy afflict them, besieging
the gates, whatsoever plague, whatsoever infirmity,
Whatsoever curse or imprecation shall happen to any man of thy
people Israel: when a man shall know the wound of his own heart, and
shall spread forth his hands in this house;
Then hear thou in heaven, in the place of thy dwelling, and
forgive, and do so as to give to every one according to his ways, as
thou shalt see his heart (for thou only knowest the heart of all the
children of men)
That they may fear thee all the days that they live upon the face
of the land, which thou hast given to our fathers.
Moreover also the stranger, who is not of thy people Israel, when
he shall come out of a far country for thy name's sake, (for they shall
hear every where of thy great name, and thy mighty hand,
And thy stretched out arm) so when he shall come, and shall pray
in this place,
Then hear thou in heaven, in the firmament of thy dwelling place,
and do all those things, for which that stranger shall call upon thee:
that all the people of the earth may learn to fear thy name, as do thy
people Israel, and may prove that thy name is called upon on this house,
which I have built.
If thy people go out to war against their enemies, by what way
soever thou shalt send them, they shall pray to thee towards the way of
the city, which thou hast chosen, and towards the house, which I have
built to thy name:
And then hear thou in heaven their prayers, and their
supplications, and do judgment for them.
But if they sin against thee, (for there is no man who sinneth
not) and thou being angry, deliver them up to their enemies, so that
they be led away captives into the land of their enemies, far or near;
Then if they do penance in their heart, in the place of captivity,
and being converted, make supplication to thee in their captivity,
saying: We have sinned, we have done unjustly, we have committed
wickedness:
And return to thee with all their heart, and all their soul, in
the land of their enemies, to which they have been led captives: and
pray to thee towards the way of their land, which thou gavest to their
fathers, and of the city which thou hast chosen, and of the temple which
Then hear thou in heaven, in the firmament of thy throne, their
prayers, and their supplications, and do judgment for them:
And forgive thy people, that have sinned against thee, and all
their iniquities, by which they have transgressed against thee: and give
them mercy before them that have made them captives, that they may have
compassion on them.
For they are thy people, and thy inheritance, whom thou hast
brought out of the land of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron.
That thy eyes may be open to the supplication of thy servant, and
of thy people Israel, to hear them in all things for which they shall
call upon thee.
For thou hast separated them to thyself for an inheritance, from
amongst all the people of the earth, as thou hast spoken by Moses, thy
servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord God.
And it came to pass, when Solomon had made an end of praying all
this prayer and supplication to the Lord, that he rose from before the
altar of the Lord: for he had fixed both knees on the ground, and had
spread his hands towards heaven.
And he stood, and blessed all the assembly of Israel with a loud
voice, saying:
Blessed be the Lord, who hath given rest to his people Israel,
according to all that he promised: there hath not failed so much as one
word of all the good things that he promised by his servant Moses.
The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our fathers, and not
leave us, nor cast us off:
But may he incline our hearts to himself, that we may walk in all
his ways, and keep his commandments, and his ceremonies, and all his
judgments, which he commanded our fathers.
And let these my words, wherewith I have prayed before the Lord,
be nigh unto the Lord our God day and night, that he may do judgment for
his servant, and for his people Israel, day by day:
That all the people of the earth may know, that the Lord he is
Let our hearts also be perfect with the Lord our God, that we may
walk in his statutes, and keep his commandments, as at this day.
And the king, and all Israel with him, offered victims before the
And Solomon slew victims of peace offerings, which he sacrificed
to the Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty
thousand sheep so the king, and all the children of Israel, dedicated
the temple of the Lord.
In that day the king sanctified the middle of the court, that was
before the house of the Lord for there he offered the holocaust, and
sacrifice, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the brazen altar
that was before the Lord, was too little to receive the holocaust, and
sacrifice, and the fat of the peace offerings.
And Solomon made at the same time a solemn feast, and all Israel
with him, a great multitude, from the entrance of Emath to the river of
fourteen days.
And on the eighth day, he sent away the people: and they blessed
the king, and went to their dwellings, rejoicing, and glad in heart, for
all the good things that the Lord had done for David, his servant, and
for Israel, his people.
fleet to Ophir.
And it came to pass when Solomon had finished the building of the
house of the Lord, and the king's house, and all that he desired and was
pleased to do,
That the Lord appeared to him the second time, as he had appeared
to him in Gabaon.
And the Lord said to him: I have heard thy prayer and thy
supplication, which thou hast made before me: I have sanctified this
house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and my
eyes, and my heart, shall be there always.
And if thou wilt walk before me, as thy father walked, in
simplicity of heart, and in uprightness: and wilt do all that I have
commanded thee, and wilt keep my ordinances, and my judgments,
sincerity and integrity of a single heart, as opposite to all double
dealing and deceit.
I will establish the throne of thy kingdom over Israel for ever, as
race upon the throne of Israel.
But if you and your children, revolting, shall turn away from
following me, and will not keep my commandments, and my ceremonies,
which I have set before you, but will go and worship strange gods, and
adore them:
I will take away Israel from the face of the land which I have
given them; and the temple which I have sanctified to my name, I will
cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb, and a byword among
all people.
And this house shall be made an example of: every one that shall
pass by it, shall be astonished, and shall hiss, and say: Why hath the
And they shall answer: Because they forsook the Lord their God, who
brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and followed strange
gods, and adored them, and worshipped them: therefore hath the Lord
brought upon them all this evil.
And when twenty years were ended, after Solomon had built the two
houses; that is, the house of the Lord, and the house of the king,
(Hiram, the king of Tyre, furnishing Solomon with cedar trees, and
fir trees, and gold, according to all he had need of) then Solomon gave
And Hiram came out of Tyre, to see the towns which Solomon had
given him, and they pleased him not;
And he said: Are these the cities which thou hast given me,
brother? And he called them the land of Chabul, unto this day.
And Hiram sent to king Solomon a hundred and twenty talents of
gold.
This is the sum of the expenses, which king Solomon offered to
build the house of the Lord, and his own house, and Mello, and the wall
of Jerusalem, and Heser, and Mageddo, and Gazer.
Pharao, the king of Egypt, came up and took Gazer, and burnt it
with fire: and slew the Chanaanite that dwelt in the city, and gave it
for a dowry to his daughter, Solomon's wife.
So Solomon built Gazer, and Bethhoron the nether,
And Baalath, and Palmira, in the land of the wilderness.
And all the towns that belonged to himself, and were not walled,
he fortified; the cities also of the chariots, and the cities of the
horsemen, and whatsoever he had a mind to build in Jerusalem, and in
All the people that were left of the Amorrhites, and Hethites, and
Their children, that were left in the land; to wit, such as the
children of Israel had not been able to destroy, Solomon made tributary
unto this day.
But of the children of Israel, Solomon made not any to be bondmen,
but they were warriors, and his servants, and his princes, and captains,
and overseers of the chariots and horses.
And there were five hundred and fifty chief officers set over all
the works of Solomon, and they had people under them, and had charge
over the appointed works.
And the daughter of Pharao came up out of the city of David to her
house, which Solomon had built for her: then did he build Mello.
Solomon also offered three times every year holocausts, and
victims of peace offerings, upon the altar which he had built to the
And king Solomon made a fleet in Asiongaber, which is by Ailath,
on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.
And Hiram sent his servants in the fleet, sailors that had
knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.
And they came to Ophir; and they brought from thence to king
And the queen of Saba having heard of the fame of Solomon in the
name of the Lord, came to try him with hard questions.
And entering into Jerusalem with a great train, and riches, and
camels that carried spices, and an immense quantity of gold, and
precious stones, she came to king Solomon, and spoke to him all that she
had in her heart.
And Solomon informed her of all the things she proposed to him:
there was not any word the king was ignorant of, and which he could not
answer her.
And when the queen of Saba saw all the wisdom of Solomon, and the
house which he had built,
And the meat of his table, and the apartments of his servants, and
the order of his ministers, and their apparel, and the cupbearers, and
the holocausts, which he offered in the house of the Lord, she had no
longer any spirit in her;
And she said to the king: The report is true, which I heard in my
own country,
Concerning thy words, and concerning thy wisdom.  And I did not
believe them that told me, till I came myself, and saw with my own eyes,
and have found that the half hath not been told me: thy wisdom and thy
works exceed the fame which I heard.
Blessed are thy men, and blessed are thy servants, who stand
before thee always, and hear thy wisdom.
Blessed be the Lord thy God, whom thou hast pleased, and who hath
set thee upon the throne of Israel, because the Lord hath loved Israel
for ever, and hath appointed thee king, to do judgment and justice.
And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices a very great store, and precious stones: there was brought no
more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Saba gave to
king Solomon.
(The navy also of Hiram, which brought gold from Ophir, brought
from Ophir great plenty of thyine trees, and precious stones.
And the king made of the thyine trees the rails of the house of
the Lord, and of the king's house: and citterns and harps for singers:
there were no such thyine trees as these brought nor seen unto this
day.)
And king Solomon gave the queen of Saba all that she desired, and
asked of him: besides what he offered her of himself of his royal
bounty. And she returned, and went to her own country, with her
servants.
And the weight of the gold that was brought to Solomon every
year, was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold:
Besides that which the men brought him that were over the
tributes, and the merchants, and they that sold by retail, and all the
kings of Arabia, and the governors of the country.
And Solomon made two hundred shields of the purest gold: he
allowed six hundred sicles of gold for the plates of one shield.
And three hundred targets of fine gold: three hundred pounds of
gold covered one target: and the king put them in the house of the
forest of Libanus.
King Solomon also made a great throne of ivory: and overlaid it
with the finest gold.
It had six steps: and the top of the throne was round behind: and
there were two hands on either side holding the seat: and two lions
stood, one at each hand,
And twelve little lions stood upon the six steps, on the one side
and on the other: there was no such work made in any kingdom.
Moreover, all the vessels out of which king Solomon drank, were
of gold: and all the furniture of the house of the forest of Libanus was
of most pure gold: there was no silver, nor was any account made of it
in the days of Solomon:
For the king's navy, once in three years, went with the navy of
elephants' teeth, and apes, and peacocks.
And king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches
and wisdom.
And all the earth desired to see Solomon's face, to hear his
wisdom, which God had given in his heart.
And every one brought him presents, vessels of silver and of
gold, garments, and armour, and spices, and horses, and mules, every
year.
And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen, and he had a
thousand four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen: and he
bestowed them in fenced cities, and with the king in Jerusalem.
And he made silver to be as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones: and
cedars to be as common as sycamores which grow in the plains.
And horses were brought for Solomon out of Egypt, and Coa: for
the king's merchants bought them out of Coa, and brought them at a set
price.
And a chariot of four horses came out of Egypt, for six hundred
sicles of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty. And after this
manner did all the kings of the Hethites, and of Syria, sell horses.
adversaries, Adad, Razon, and Jeroboam: Solomon dieth.
And king Solomon loved many strange women, besides the daughter of
of the Hethites:
Of the nations concerning which the Lord said to the children of
into yours: for they will most certainly turn away your hearts to follow
their gods. And to these was Solomon joined with a most ardent love.
And he had seven hundred wives as queens, and three hundred
concubines: and the women turned away his heart.
And when he was now old, his heart was turned away by women to
follow strange gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his
But Solomon worshipped Astarthe, the goddess of the Sidonians, and
And Solomon did that which was not pleasing before the Lord, and
did not fully follow the Lord, as David, his father.
Then Solomon built a temple for Chamos, the idol of Moab, on the
hill that is over against Jerusalem, and for Moloch, the idol of the
children of Ammon.
And he did in this manner for all his wives that were strangers,
who burnt incense, and offered sacrifice to their gods.
And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his mind was turned
away from the Lord, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice;
And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not
follow strange gods: but he kept not the things which the Lord commanded
him.
The Lord therefore said to Solomon: Because thou hast done this,
and hast not kept my covenant, and my precepts, which I have commanded
thee, I will divide and rend thy kingdom, and will give it to thy
servant.
Nevertheless, in thy days I will not do it, for David thy
father's sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
Neither will I take away the whole kingdom; but I will give one
tribe to thy son, for the sake of David, my servant, and Jerusalem,
which I have chosen.
And the Lord raised up an adversary to Solomon, Adad, the
For when David was in Edom, and Joab, the general of the army,
was gone up to bury them that were slain, and had killed every male in
(For Joab remained there six months with all Israel, till he had
slain every male in Edom,)
Then Adad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants,
with him, to go into Egypt: and Adad was then a little boy.
And they arose out of Madian, and came into Pharan, and they took
men with them from Pharan, and went into Egypt, to Pharao, the king of
him land.
And Adad found great favour before Pharao, insomuch that he gave
him to wife the own sister of his wife, Taphnes, the queen.
And the sister of Taphnes bore him his son, Genubath; and Taphnes
brought him up in the house of Pharao: and Genubath dwelt with Pharao
among his children.
And when Adad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers,
and that Joab, the general of the army, was dead, he said to Pharao: Let
me depart, that I may go to my own country.
And Pharao said to him: Why, what is wanting to thee with me,
that thou seekest to go to thy own country?  But he answered: Nothing;
yet I beseech thee to let me go.
God also raised up against him an adversary, Razon, the son of
And he gathered men against him, and he became a captain of
robbers, when David slew them of Soba: and they went to Damascus, and
dwelt there, and they made him king in Damascus.
And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon: and
this is the evil of Adad, and his hatred against Israel; and he reigned
in Syria.
Jeroboam also, the son of Nabat, an Ephrathite, of Sareda, a
servant of Solomon, whose mother was named Sarua, a widow woman, lifted
up his hand against the king.
And this is the cause of his rebellion against him; for Solomon
built Mello, and filled up the breach of the city of David, his father.
And Jeroboam was a valiant and mighty man: and Solomon seeing him
a young man ingenious and industrious, made him chief over the tributes
of all the house of Joseph.
So it came to pass at that time, that Jeroboam went out of
found him in the way: and they two were alone in the field.
And Ahias taking his new garment, wherewith he was clad, divided
it into twelve parts:
And he said to Jeroboam: Take to thee ten pieces: for thus saith
the Lord, the God of Israel: Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the
hand of Solomon, and will give thee ten tribes.
But one tribe shall remain to him for the sake of my servant,
of Israel:
Because he hath forsaken me, and hath adored Astarthe, the
goddess of the Sidonians, and Chamos, the god of Moab, and Moloch, the
god of the children of Ammon: and hath not walked in my ways, to do
justice before me, and to keep my precepts, and judgments, as did David,
his father.
Yet I will not take away all the kingdom out of his hand, but I
will make him prince all the days of his life, for David my servant's
sake, whom I chose, who kept my commandments, and my precepts.
But I will take away the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will
give thee ten tribes:
And to his son I will give one tribe, that there may remain a
lamp for my servant, David, before me always in Jerusalem, the city
which I have chosen, that my name might be there.
And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign over all that thy soul
desireth, and thou shalt be king over Israel.
If then thou wilt hearken to all that I shall command thee, and
wilt walk in my ways, and do what is right before me, keeping my
commandments and my precepts, as David, my servant, did: I will be with
thee, and will build thee up a faithful house, as I built a house for
And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but yet not for
ever.
Solomon, therefore, sought to kill Jeroboam: but he arose, and
fled into Egypt, to Sesac, the king of Egypt, and was in Egypt till the
death of Solomon.
And the rest of the words of Solomon, and all that he did and his
wisdom: behold they are all written in the book of the words of the days
of Solomon.
mentioned in holy writ.
And the days that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem, over all Israel,
were forty years.
And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
of age, having reigned forty years.
of the people. They make Jeroboam king over ten tribes: he setteth up
idolatry.
And Roboam went to Sichem: for thither were all Israel come
together to make him king.
But Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who was yet in Egypt, a fugitive
from the face of king Solomon, hearing of his death, returned out of
And they sent and called him: and Jeroboam came, and all the
multitude of Israel, and they spoke to Roboam, saying:
Thy father laid a grievous yoke upon us: now, therefore, do thou
take off a little of the grievous service of thy father, and of his most
heavy yoke, which he put upon us, and we will serve thee.
And he said to them: Go till the third day, and come to me again.
King Roboam took counsel with the old men, that stood before
you give me, that I may answer this people?
They said to him: If thou wilt yield to this people to day, and
condescend to them, and grant their petition, and wilt speak gentle
words to them, they will be thy servants always.
But he left the counsel of the old men, which they had given him,
and consulted with the young men that had been brought up with him, and
stood before him.
And he said to them: What counsel do you give me, that I may
answer this people, who have said to me: Make the yoke, which thy father
put upon us, lighter?
And the young men that had been brought up with him, said: Thus
shalt thou speak to this people, who have spoken to thee, saying: Thy
father made our yoke heavy, do thou ease us.  Thou shalt say to them: My
little finger is thicker than the back of my father.
And now my father put a heavy yoke upon you, but I will add to
your yoke: my father beat you with whips, but I will beat you with
scorpions.
So Jeroboam, and all the people, came to Roboam the third day, as
the king had appointed, saying: Come to me again the third day.
And the king answered the people roughly, leaving the counsel of
the old men, which they had given him,
And he spoke to them according to the counsel of the young men,
saying: My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke: My
father beat you with whips, but I will beat you with scorpions.
And the king condescended not to the people: for the Lord was
turned away from him, to make good his word, which he had spoken in the
hand of Ahias, the Silonite, to Jeroboam, the son of Nabat.
Then the people, seeing that the king would not hearken to them,
answered him, saying: What portion have we in David? or what inheritance
in the son of Isai? Go home to thy dwellings, O Israel: now, David, look
to thy own house. So Israel departed to their dwellings.
But as for all the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of
Then king Roboam sent Aduram, who was over the tribute: and all
him up into his chariot, and he fled to Jerusalem:
And Israel revolted from the house of David, unto this day.
And it came to pass when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come
again, that they gathered an assembly, and sent and called him, and made
him king over all Israel, and there was none that followed the house of
tribe of Juda, (the very city of Jerusalem being partly in Juda, partly
in Benjamin,) that they are here counted but as one tribe.
And Roboam came to Jerusalem, and gathered together all the house
of Juda, and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred fourscore thousand chosen
men for war, to fight against the house of Israel, and to bring the
kingdom again under Roboam, the son of Solomon.
But the word of the Lord came to Semeias, the man of God, saying:
Speak to Roboam, the son of Solomon, the king of Juda, and to all
the house of Juda, and Benjamin, and the rest of the people, saying:
Thus saith the Lord: You shall not go up, nor fight against your
brethren, the children of Israel: let every man return to his house, for
this thing is from me. They hearkened to the word of the Lord, and
returned from their journey, as the Lord had commanded them.
And Jeroboam built Sichem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt there, and
going out from thence, he built Phanuel.
And Jeroboam said in his heart: Now shall the kingdom return to
the house of David,
If this people go up to offer sacrifices in the house of the Lord
at Jerusalem: and the heart of this people will turn to their lord
 And finding out a device, he made two golden calves, and said to
them: Go ye up no more to Jerusalem: Behold thy gods, O Israel, who
brought thee out of the land of Egypt.
mimicked the Egyptians, among whom he had sojourned, who worshipped
their Apis and their Osiris under the form of a bullock.
And he set the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan:
southern part of the dominions of Jeroboam, about six leagues from
confines of Syria.
And this thing became an occasion of sin: for the people went to
adore the calf as far as Dan.
And he made temples in the high places, and priests of the lowest
of the people, who were not of the sons of Levi.
And he appointed a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth
day of the month, after the manner of the feast that was celebrated in
sacrifice to the calves, which he had made: and he placed in Bethel
priests of the high places, which he had made.
And he went up to the altar, which he had built in Bethel, on the
fifteenth day of the eighth month, which he had devised of his own
heart: and he ordained a feast to the children of Israel, and went up on
the altar to burn incense.
the destruction of Jeroboam's altar. Jeroboam's hand offering violence
to the prophet withereth, but is restored by the prophet's prayer: the
same prophet is deceived by another prophet, and slain by a lion.
And behold there came a man of God out of Juda, by the word of the
incense.
And he cried out against the altar in the word of the Lord, and
said: O altar, altar, thus saith the Lord: Behold a child shall be born
to the house of David, Josias by name, and he shall immolate upon thee
the priests of the high places, who now burn incense upon thee, and he
shall burn men's bones upon thee.
And he gave a sign the same day, saying: This shall be the sign,
that the Lord hath spoken: Behold the altar shall be rent, and the ashes
that are upon it, shall be poured out.
And when the king had heard the word of the man of God, which he
had cried out against the altar in Bethel, he stretched forth his hand
from the altar, saying: Lay hold on him. And his hand which he stretched
forth against him, withered: and he was not able to draw it back again
to him.
The altar also was rent, and the ashes were poured out from the
altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given before in
the word of the Lord.
And the king said to the man of God: Entreat the face of the Lord
thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored to me. And the
man of God besought the face of the Lord, and the king's hand was
restored to him, and it became as it was before.
And the king said to the man of God: Come home with me to dine,
and I will make thee presents.
And the man of God answered the king: If thou wouldst give me half
thy house, I will not go with thee, nor eat bread, nor drink water in
this place:
For so it was enjoined me by the word of the Lord commanding me:
that thou camest.
So he departed by another way, and returned not by the way that
he came into Bethel.
Now a certain old prophet dwelt in Bethel, and his sons came to
him, and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in
king.
And their father said to them: What way went he? His sons shewed
him the way by which the man of God went, who came out of Juda.
And he said to his sons: Saddle me the ass. And when they had
saddled it, he got up,
And went after the man of God, and found him sitting under a
turpentine tree: and he said to him: Art thou the man of God who camest
from Juda? He answered: I am.
And he said to him: Come home with me to eat bread.
But he said: I must not return, nor go with thee, neither will I
eat bread, or drink water in this place:
Because the Lord spoke to me, in the word of the Lord, saying:
return by the way thou wentest.
He said to him: I also am a prophet like unto thee: and an angel
spoke to me, in the word of the Lord, saying: Bring him back with thee
into thy house, that he may eat bread, and drink water. He deceived him,
prophet, but he sinned in thus deceiving the man of God; the more
because he pretended a revelation for what he did.
And brought him back with him: so he ate bread, and drank water
in his house.
And as they sat at table, the word of the Lord came to the
prophet that brought him back:
And he cried out to the man of God who came out of Juda, saying:
and hast not kept the commandment which the Lord thy God commanded thee,
And hast returned, and eaten bread, and drunk water in the place
wherein he commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat bread, nor drink
water, thy dead body shall not be brought into the sepulchre of thy
fathers.
And when he had eaten and drunk, he saddled his ass for the
prophet, whom he had brought back.
And when he was gone, a lion found him in the way, and killed
him, and his body was cast in the way: and the ass stood by him, and the
lion stood by the dead body.
may spare them hereafter. For the generality of divines are of opinion,
that the sin of this prophet, considered with all its circumstances, was
not mortal.
And behold, men passing by, saw the dead body cast in the way,
and the lion standing by the body. And they came and told it in the
city, wherein that old prophet dwelt.
And when that prophet, who had brought him back out of the way,
heard of it, he said: It is the man of God, that was disobedient to the
mouth of the Lord, and the Lord hath delivered him to the lion, and he
hath torn him, and killed him, according to the word of the Lord, which
he spoke to him.
And he said to his sons: Saddle me an ass. And when they had
saddled it,
And he was gone, he found the dead body cast in the way, and the
ass and the lion standing by the carcass: the lion had not eaten of the
dead body, nor hurt the ass.
And the prophet took up the body of the man of God, and laid it
upon the ass, and going back brought it into the city of the old
prophet, to mourn for him.
And he laid his dead body in his own sepulchre: and they mourned
over him, saying:  Alas! alas, my brother.
And when they had mourned over him, he said to his sons: When I
am dead, bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried: lay
my bones beside his bones.
For assuredly the word shall come to pass which he hath foretold
in the word of the Lord, against the altar that is in Bethel: and
against all the temples of the high places, that are in the cities of
After these words, Jeroboam came not back from his wicked way:
but on the contrary, he made of the meanest of the people priests of the
high places: whosoever would, he filled his hand, and he was made a
priest of the high places.
And for this cause did the house of Jeroboam sin, and was cut
off, and destroyed from the face of the earth.
and is succeeded by his son Nadab. The king of Egypt taketh and
pillageth Jerusalem. Roboam dieth and his son Abiam succeedeth.
At that time Abia, the son of Jeroboam, fell sick.
And Jeroboam said to his wife: Arise, and change thy dress, that
thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam, and go to Silo, where
Take also with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a pot of honey,
and go to him: for he will tell thee what will become of this child.
Jeroboam's wife did as he told her: and rising up, went to Silo,
and came to the house of Ahias; but he could not see, for his eyes were
dim by reason of his age.
And the Lord said to Ahias: Behold the wife of Jeroboam cometh in,
to consult thee concerning her son, that is sick: thus and thus shalt
thou speak to her. So when she was coming in, and made as if she were
another woman,
Ahias heard the sound of her feet, coming in at the door, and
said: Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam: why dost thou feign thyself to be
another? But I am sent to thee with heavy tidings.
Go, and tell Jeroboam: Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: For
as much as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince
over my people Israel;
And rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it to
thee, and thou hast not been as my servant, David, who kept my
commandments, and followed me with all his heart, doing that which was
well pleasing in my sight:
But hast done evil above all that were before thee, and hast made
thee strange gods, and molten gods, to provoke me to anger, and hast
cast me behind thy back:
Therefore, behold I will bring evils upon the house of Jeroboam,
and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and
him that is shut up, and the last in Israel: and I will sweep away the
remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as dung is swept away till all be
clean.
Them that shall die of Jeroboam in the city, the dogs shall eat:
and them that shall die in the field, the birds of the air shall devour:
for the Lord hath spoken it.
Arise thou, therefore, and go to thy house: and when thy feet
shall be entering into the city, the child shall die,
And all Israel shall mourn for him, and shall bury him: for he
only of Jeroboam shall be laid in a sepulchre, because in his regard
there is found a good word from the Lord, the God of Israel, in the
house of Jeroboam.
And the Lord hath appointed himself a king over Israel, who shall
cut off the house of Jeroboam in this day, and in this time:
And the Lord God shall strike Israel as a reed is shaken in the
water: and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave
to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river: because they
have made to themselves groves, to provoke the Lord.
And the Lord shall give up Israel for the sins of Jeroboam, who
hath sinned, and made Israel to sin.
And the wife of Jeroboam arose, and departed, and came to Thersa:
and when she was coming in to the threshold of the house, the child
died,
And they buried him. And all Israel mourned for him, according to
the word of the Lord, which he spoke by the hand of his servant Ahias,
the prophet.
And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he fought, and how he
reigned, behold they are written in the book of the words of the days of
the kings of Israel.
which is often mentioned in the Book of Kings, is long since lost. For
as to the books of Paralipomenon, or Chronicles, (which the Hebrews call
the words of the days,) they were certainly written after the Book of
And the days that Jeroboam reigned, were two and twenty years:
and he slept with his fathers: and Nadab, his son, reigned in his stead.
And Roboam, the son of Solomon, reigned in Juda: Roboam was one
and forty years old when he began to reign: and he reigned seventeen
years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord chose out of all the tribes
of Israel to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naama, an
And Juda did evil in the sight of the Lord, and provoked him
above all that their fathers had done, in their sins which they
committed.
For they also built them altars, and statues, and groves, upon
every high hill, and under every green tree:
There were also the effeminate in the land, and they did
according to all the abominations of the people, whom the Lord had
destroyed before the face of the children of Israel.
And in the fifth year of the reign of Roboam, Sesac, king of
And he took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the
king's treasures, and carried all off: as also the shields of gold which
And Roboam made shields of brass instead of them, and delivered
them into the hand of the captains of the shieldbearers, and of them
that kept watch before the gate of the king's house.
And when the king went into the house of the Lord, they whose
office it was to go before him, carried them: and afterwards they
brought them back to the armoury of the shieldbearers.
Now the rest of the acts of Roboam, and all that he did, behold
they are written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
And there was war between Roboam and Jeroboam always.
And Roboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with them, in
the city of David:  and his mother's name was Naama, an Ammonitess: and
of Israel.
Now in the eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam, the son of
He reigned three years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was
it was common in those days for the same person to have two names.
And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done
before him: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was
the heart of David, his father.
But for David's sake the Lord his God gave him a lamp in
Because David had done that which was right in the eyes of the
the days of his life, except the matter of Urias, the Hethite.
But there was war between Roboam and Jeroboam all the time of his
life.
And the rest of the words of Abiam, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
And Abiam slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of David: and Asa, his son, reigned in his stead.
So in the twentieth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel, reigned Asa,
king of Juda,
And he reigned one and forty years in Jerusalem. His mother's
name was Maacha, the daughter of Abessalom.
not improbable, that the Maacha here named is different from the Maacha
mentioned, ver. 2.
And Asa did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, as did
And he took away the effeminate out of the land, and removed all
the filth of the idols, which his fathers had made.
Moreover, he also removed his mother, Maacha, from being the
princess in the sacrifices of Priapus, and in the grove which she had
consecrated to him: and he destroyed her den, and broke in pieces the
filthy idol, and burnt it by the torrent Cedron:
But the high places he did not take away. Nevertheless, the heart
of Asa was perfect with the Lord all his days:
kinds. Some were set up, and dedicated to the worship of idols, or
strange gods; and these Asa removed, 2 Par. 14.2; others were only
altars of the true God, but were erected contrary to the law, which
allowed of no sacrifices but in the temple; and these were not removed
by Asa.-Ibid. Perfect with the Lord... Asa had his faults; but never
forsook the worship of the Lord.
And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and
he had vowed, into the house of the Lord, silver and gold, and vessels.
And there was war between Asa, and Baasa, king of Israel, all
their days.
And Baasa, king of Israel, went up against Juda, and built Rama,
that no man might go out or come in of the side of Asa, king of Juda.
Then Asa took all the silver and gold that remained in the
treasures of the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king's
house, and delivered it into the hands of his servants: and sent them to
There is a league between me and thee, and between my father and
thy father: therefore I have sent thee presents of silver and gold: and
that he may depart from me.
Benadad, hearkening to king Asa, sent the captains of his army
against the cities of Israel, and they smote Ahion, and Dan, and
And when Baasa had heard this, he left off building Rama, and
returned into Thersa.
But king Asa sent word into all Juda, saying: Let no man be
excused: and they took away the stones from Rama, and the timber
thereof, wherewith Baasa had been building, and with them king Asa built
But the rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his strength, and
all that he did, and the cities that he built, are they not written in
the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda? But in the time
of his old age he was diseased in his feet.
And he slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in the
city of David, his father. And Josaphat, his son, reigned in his place.
But Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, reigned over Israel the second
year of Asa, king of Juda: and he reigned over Israel two years.
And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways
of his father, and in his sins, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
And Baasa, the son of Ahias, of the house of Issachar, conspired
against him, and slew him in Gebbethon, which is a city of the
So Baasa slew him in the third year of Asa, king of Juda, and
reigned in his place.
And when he was king, he cut off all the house of Jeroboam: he
left not so much as one soul of his seed, till he had utterly destroyed
him, according to the word of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand
of Ahias, the Silonite:
Because of the sin of Jeroboam, which he had sinned, and
wherewith he had made Israel to sin, and for the offence wherewith he
provoked the Lord, the God of Israel.
But the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
And there was war between Asa and Baasa, the king of Israel, all
their days.
In the third year of Asa, king of Juda, Baasa, the son of Ahias,
reigned over all Israel, in Thersa, four and twenty years.
And he did evil before the Lord, and walked in the ways of
destroyed by Zambri. Of the reign of Amri father of Achab.
Then the word of the Lord came to Jehu, the son of Hanani, against
For as much as I have exalted thee out of the dust and made thee
prince over my people Israel, and thou hast walked in the way of
with their sins:
Behold I will cut down the posterity of Baasa, and the posterity
of his house, and I will make thy house as the house of Jeroboam, the
son of Nabat.
Him that dieth of Baasa, in the city, the dogs shall eat: and him
that dieth of his in the country, the fowls of the air shall devour.
 But the rest of the acts of Baasa, and all that he did, and his
battles, are they not written in the book of the words of the days of
the kings of Israel?
So Baasa slept with his fathers, and was buried in Thersa: and
And when the word of the Lord came in the hand of Jehu, the son of
all the evil that he had done before the Lord, to provoke him to anger
by the works of his hands, to become as the house of Jeroboam: for this
cause he slew him; that is to say, Jehu, the son of Hanani, the prophet.
In the six and twentieth year of Asa, king of Juda, Ela, the son
of Baasa, reigned over Israel, in Thersa, two years.
And his servant Zambri, who was captain of half the horsemen,
rebelled against him: now Ela was drinking in Thersa, and drunk in the
house of Arsa, the governor of Thersa.
And Zambri rushing in, struck him, and slew him, in the seven and
twentieth year of Asa, king of Juda and he reigned in his stead.
And when he was king, and sat upon his throne, he slew all the
house of Baasa, and he left not one thereof to piss against a wall and
all his kinsfolks and friends.
And Zambri destroyed all the house of Baasa, according to the
word of the Lord, that he had spoken to Baasa, in the hand of Jehu, the
prophet,
For all the sins of Baasa, and the sins of Ela, his son, who
sinned, and made Israel to sin, provoking the Lord, the God of Israel,
with their vanities.
But the rest of the acts of Ela, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
In the seven and twentieth year of Asa, king of Juda, Zambri
reigned seven days in Thersa: now the army was besieging Gebbethon, a
city of the Philistines.
And when they heard that Zambri had rebelled, and slain the king,
all Israel made Amri their king, who was general over Israel in the camp
that day.
And Amri went up, and all Israel with him, from Gebbethon, and
they besieged Thersa.
And Zambri, seeing that the city was about to be taken, went into
the palace, and burnt himself with the king's house: and he died
In his sins, which he had sinned, doing evil before the Lord, and
walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin, wherewith he made Israel
to sin.
But the rest of the acts of Zambri, and of his conspiracy and
tyranny, are they not written in the book of the words of the days of
the kings of Israel?
Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts: one half
of the people followed Thebni, the son of Gineth, to make him king: and
one half followed Amri.
But the people that were with Amri, prevailed over the people
that followed Thebni, the son of Gineth: and Thebni died, and Amri
reigned.
In the one and thirtieth year of Asa, king of Juda, Amri reigned
over Israel twelve years: in Thersa he reigned six years.
and twentieth year of Asa; but had not quiet possession of the kingdom
till the death of his competitor Thebni, which was in the one and
thirtieth year of Asa's reign.
And he bought the hill of Samaria of Semer, for two talents of
silver: and he built upon it, and he called the city which he built
And Amri did evil in the sight of the Lord, and acted wickedly
above all that were before him.
And he walked in all the way of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, and
in his sins, wherewith he made Israel to sin: to provoke the Lord, the
false, deceitful things.
Now the rest of the acts of Amri, and the battles he fought, are
they not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
And Amri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, and
Now Achab, the son of Amri, reigned over Israel in the eight and
thirtieth year of Asa, king of Juda. And Achab, the son of Amri, reigned
over Israel in Samaria two and twenty years.
And Achab, the son of Amri, did evil in the sight of the Lord
above all that were before him.
Nor was it enough for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam, the
son of Nabat: but he also took to wife Jezabel, daughter of Ethbaal,
king of the Sidonians. And he went, and served Baal, and adored him.
And he set up an altar for Baal, in the temple of Baal, which he
had built in Samaria;
And he planted a grove: and Achab did more to provoke the Lord,
the God of Israel, than all the kings of Israel that were before him.
In his days Hiel, of Bethel, built Jericho: in Abiram, his
firstborn, he laid its foundations: and in his youngest son, Segub, he
set up the gates thereof: according to the word of the Lord, which he
spoke in the hand of Josue, the son of Nun.
afterwards by a widow of Sarephta. He raiseth the window's son to life.
And Elias the Thesbite, of the inhabitants of Galaad, said to
there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to the words
of my mouth.
And the word of the Lord came to him, saying:
Get thee hence, and go towards the east, and hide thyself by the
torrent of Carith, which is over against the Jordan;
And there thou shalt drink of the torrent: and I have commanded
the ravens to feed thee there.
So he went, and did according to the word of the Lord: and going,
he dwelt by the torrent Carith, which is over against the Jordan.
And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and
bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the torrent.
But after some time the torrent was dried up: for it had not
rained upon the earth.
Then the word of the Lord came to him, saying:
Arise, and go to Sarephta of the Sidonians, and dwell there: for I
have commanded a widow woman there to feed thee.
He arose, and went to Sarephta. And when he was come to the gate
of the city, he saw the widow woman gathering sticks, and he called her,
and said to her: Give me a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.
And when she was going to fetch it, he called after her, saying:
And she answered: As the Lord thy God liveth, I have no bread,
but only a handful of meal in a pot, and a little oil in a cruise:
behold I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it, for me
and my son, that we may eat it and die.
And Elias said to her: Fear not; but go, and do as thou hast said
but first make for me of the same meal a little hearth cake, and bring
it to me, and after make for thyself and thy son.
For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: The pot of meal shall
not waste, nor the cruise of oil be diminished, until the day wherein
the Lord will give rain upon the face of the earth.
She went, and did according to the word of Elias: and he ate, and
she, and her house: and from that day
The pot of meal wasted not, and the cruise of oil was not
diminished according to the word of the Lord, which he spoke in the hand
of Elias.
And it came to pass after this, that the son of the woman, the
mistress of the house, fell sick, and the sickness was very grievous, so
that there was no breath left in him.
And she said to Elias: What have I to do with thee, thou man of
that thou shouldst kill my son?
And Elias said to her: Give me thy son. And he took him out of
her bosom, and carried him into the upper chamber where he abode, and
laid him upon his own bed.
And he cried to the Lord, and said: O Lord, my God, hast thou
afflicted also the widow, with whom I am after a sort maintained, so as
to kill her son?
And he stretched, and measured himself upon the child three
times, and cried to the Lord, and said: O Lord, my God, let the soul of
this child, I beseech thee, return into his body.
And the Lord heard the voice of Elias: and the soul of the child
returned into him, and he revived.
And Elias took the child, and brought him down from the upper
chamber to the house below, and delivered him to his mother, and said to
her: Behold thy son liveth.
And the woman said to Elias: Now by this I know that thou art a
man of God, and the word of the Lord in thy mouth is true.
fire from heaven: he obtaineth rain by his prayer.
After many days, the word of the Lord came to Elias, in the third
year, saying: Go, and shew thyself to Achab, that I may give rain upon
the face of the earth.
And Elias went to shew himself to Achab, and there was a grievous
famine in Samaria.
And Achab called Abdias the governor of his house: now Abdias
feared the Lord very much.
For when Jezabel killed the prophets of the Lord, he took a
hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty and fifty in caves, and fed them
with bread and water.
And Achab said to Abdias: Go into the land unto all fountains of
waters, and into all valleys, to see if we can find grass, and save the
horses and mules, that the beasts may not utterly perish.
And they divided the countries between them, that they might go
round about them: Achab went one way, and Abdias another way by himself.
And as Abdias was in the way, Elias met him:  and he knew him, and
fell on his face, and said: Art thou my lord Elias?
And he answered: I am.  Go, and tell thy master: Elias is here.
And he said: What have I sinned, that thou wouldst deliver me, thy
servant, into the hand of Achab, that he should kill me?
As the Lord thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom,
whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee: and when all answered: He is
not here: he took an oath of every kingdom and nation, because thou wast
not found.
And now thou sayest to me:  Go and tell thy master: Elias is
here.
And when I am gone from thee, the Spirit of the Lord will carry
thee into a place that I know not: and I shall go in and tell Achab; and
he, not finding thee, will kill me: but thy servant feareth the Lord
from his infancy.
Hath it not been told thee, my lord, what I did when Jezabel
killed the prophets of the Lord; how I hid a hundred men of the prophets
of the Lord, by fifty and fifty in caves, and fed them with bread and
water?
And now thou sayest: Go and tell thy master: Elias is here: that
he may kill me.
And Elias said: As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whose face I
stand, this day I will shew myself unto him.
Abdias therefore went to meet Achab, and told him: and Achab came
to meet Elias.
And when he had seen him, he said: Art thou he that troublest
And he said: I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy
father's house, who have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and have
followed Baalim.
Nevertheless send now, and gather unto me all Israel, unto Mount
prophets of the groves four hundred, who eat at Jezabel's table.
Achab sent to all the children of Israel, and gathered together
the prophets unto mount Carmel.
And Elias coming to all the people, said: How long do you halt
between two sides?  If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then
follow him.  And the people did not answer him a word.
And Elias said again to the people: I only remain a prophet of
the Lord: but the prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty men.
Let two bullocks be given us, and let them choose one bullock for
themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it upon wood, but put no fire
under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put
no fire under it.
Call ye on the names of your gods, and I will call on the name of
my Lord: and the God that shall answer by fire, let him be God.  And all
the people answering, said: A very good proposal.
Then Elias said to the prophets of Baal: Choose you one bullock
and dress it first, because you are many: and call on the names of your
gods; but put no fire under.
And they took the bullock, which he gave them, and dressed it:
and they called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon,
saying: O Baal, hear us.  But there was no voice, nor any that answered:
and they leaped over the altar that they had made.
And when it was now noon, Elias jested at them, saying: Cry with
a louder voice:  for he is a god; and perhaps he is talking, or is in an
inn, or on a journey; or perhaps he is asleep, and must be awaked.
So they cried with a loud voice, and cut themselves after their
manner with knives and lancets, till they were all covered with blood.
And after midday was past, and while they were prophesying, the
time was come of offering sacrifice, and there was no voice heard, nor
did any one answer, nor regard them as they prayed.
Elias said to all the people: Come ye unto me.  And the people
coming near unto him, he repaired the altar of the Lord, that was broken
down:
And he took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes
of the sons of Jacob to whom the word of the Lord came, saying:  Israel
shall be thy name.
And he built with the stones an altar to the name of the Lord:
and he made a trench for water, of the breadth of two furrows, round
about the altar.
And he laid the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and
laid it upon the wood.
And he said: Fill four buckets with water, and pour it upon the
burnt offering, and upon the wood.  And again he said: Do the same the
second time. And when they had done it the second time, he said: Do the
same also the third time.  And they did so the third time.
And the water run round about the altar, and the trench was
filled with water.
And when it was now time to offer the holocaust, Elias, the
prophet, came near and said: O Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and
servant, and that according to thy commandment I have done all these
things.
Dear me, O Lord, hear me: that this people may learn that thou
art the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart again.
Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the holocaust, and
the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was
in the trench.
And when all the people saw this, they fell on their faces, and
they said: The Lord, he is God; the Lord, he is God.
And Elias said to them: Take the prophets of Baal, and let not
one of them escape. And when they had taken them, Elias brought them
down to the torrent Cison, and killed them there.
And Elias said to Achab: Go up, eat and drink: for there is a
sound of abundance of rain.
Achab went up to eat and drink: and Elias went up to the top of
his knees,
And he said to his servant: Go up, and look towards the sea. And
he went up, and looked, and said: There is nothing. And again he said to
him: Return seven times.
And at the seventh time: Behold a little cloud arose out of the
sea like a man's foot. And he said: Go up, and say to Achab: Prepare thy
chariot, and go down, lest the rain prevent thee.
And while he turned himself this way and that way, behold the
heavens grew dark, with clouds and wind, and there fell a great rain.
And the hand of the Lord was upon Elias, and he girded up his
loins, and ran before Achab, till he came to Jezrahel.
the strength of that food walketh forty days, till he cometh to Horeb,
where he hath a vision of God.
And Achab told Jezabel all that Elias had done, and how he had
slain all the prophets with the sword.
And Jezabel sent a messenger to Elias, saying: Such and such
things may the gods do to me, and add still more, if by this hour to
morrow I make not thy life as the life of one of them.
Then Elias was afraid, and rising up, he went whithersoever he had
a mind: and he came to Bersabee of Juda, and left his servant there,
And he went forward, one day's journey into the desert. And when
he was there, and sat under a juniper tree, he requested for his soul
that he might die, and said: It is enough for me, Lord; take away my
soul: for I am no better than my fathers.
pusillanimity, but out of zeal against sin; and that he might no longer
be witness of the miseries of his people; and the war they were waging
against God and his servants. See ver. 10.
And he cast himself down, and slept in the shadow of the juniper
tree: and behold an angel of the Lord touched him, and said to him:
He looked, and behold there was at his head a hearth cake, and a
vessel of water: and he ate and drank, and he fell asleep again.
And the angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched
him, and said to him: Arise, eat: for thou hast yet a great way to go.
And he arose, and ate and drank, and walked in the strength of
that food forty days and forty nights, unto the mount of God, Horeb.
fed in the wilderness, was a figure of the bread of life which we
receive in the blessed sacrament; by the strength of which we are to be
supported in our journey through the wilderness of this world till we
come to the true mountain of God, and his vision in a happy eternity.
And when he was come thither, he abode in a cave: and behold the
word of the Lord came unto him, and he said to him: What dost thou here,
And he answered: With zeal have I been zealous for the Lord God
of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant: they
have thrown down thy altars, they have slain thy prophets with the
sword, and I alone am left, and they seek my life to take it away.
the ten tribes; for in the kingdom of Juda religion was at that time in
a very flourishing condition under the kings Asa and Josaphat. And even
in Israel there remained several prophets, though not then known to
And he said to him: Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the
the Lord, overthrowing the mountains, and breaking the rocks in pieces:
but the Lord is not in the wind. And after the wind, an earthquake: but
the Lord is not in the earthquake.
And after the earthquake, a fire: but the Lord is not in the
fire. And after the fire, a whistling of a gentle air.
And when Elias heard it, he covered his face with his mantle, and
coming forth, stood in the entering in of the cave, and behold a voice
unto him, saying: What dost thou here, Elias? And he answered:
With zeal have I been zealous for the Lord God of hosts: because
the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant: they have destroyed
thy altars, they have slain thy prophets with the sword; and I alone am
left, and they seek my life to take it away.
And the Lord said to him: Go, and return on thy way, through the
desert, to Damascus: and when thou art come thither, thou shalt anoint
And thou shalt anoint Jehu, the son of Namsi, to be king over
to be prophet in thy room.
And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall escape the sword
of Hazael, shall be slain by Jehu: and whosoever shall escape the sword
of Jehu, shall be slain by Eliseus.
with the material sword: but he is here joined with Hazael and Jehu, the
great instruments of God in punishing the idolatry of Israel, because he
foretold to the former his exaltation to the kingdom of Syria, and the
vengeance he would execute against Israel, and anointed the latter by
one of his disciples to be king of Israel, with commission to extirpate
the house of Achab.
And I will leave me seven thousand men in Israel, whose knees
have not been bowed before Baal, and every mouth that hath not
worshipped him, kissing the hands.
And Elias departing from thence, found Eliseus, the son of
were ploughing with, twelve yoke of oxen: and when Elias came up to him,
he cast his mantle upon him.
And he forthwith left the oxen, and run after Elias, and said:
follow thee. And he said to him: Go, and return back: for that which was
my part, I have done to thee.
And returning back from him, he took a yoke of oxen, and killed
them, and boiled the flesh with the plough of the oxen, and gave to the
people, and they ate: and rising up, he went away, and followed Elias,
and ministered to him.
reprehended by a prophet for letting Benadad go.
And Benadad, king of Syria, gathered together all his host, and
there were two and thirty kings with him, and horses, and chariots: and
going up, he fought against Samaria, and besieged it.
And sending messengers to Achab, king of Israel, into the city,
He said: Thus saith Benadad: Thy silver and thy gold is mine: and
thy wives and thy goodliest children are mine.
And the king of Israel answered: According to thy word, my lord, O
king, I am thine, and all that I have.
And the messengers came again, and said: Thus saith Benadad, who
sent us unto thee: Thy silver and thy gold, and thy wives and thy
children, thou shalt deliver up to me.
To morrow, therefore, at this same hour, I will send my servants
to thee, and they shall search thy house, and the houses of thy
servants: and all that pleaseth them, they shall put in their hands, and
take away.
And the king of Israel called all the ancients of the land, and
said: Mark, and see that he layeth snares for us. For he sent to me for
my wives, and for my children, and for my silver and gold: and I said
not nay.
And all the ancients, and all the people said to him: Hearken not
to him, nor consent to him.
Wherefore he answered the messengers of Benadad: Tell my lord, the
king: All that thou didst send for to me, thy servant at first, I will
do: but this thing I cannot do.
And the messengers returning brought him word.  And he sent
again, and said: Such and such things may the gods do to me, and more
may they add, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all
the people that follow me.
And the king of Israel answering, said: Tell him: Let not the
girded boast himself as the ungirded.
then be time to glory when he putteth off his armour, having overcome
his adversary.
And it came to pass, when Benadad heard this word, that he and
the kings were drinking in pavilions, and he said to his servants: Beset
the city. And they beset it.
And behold a prophet coming to Achab, king of Israel, said to
him:  Thus saith the Lord: Hast thou seen all this exceeding great
multitude? behold I will deliver them into thy hand this day: that thou
mayst know that I am the Lord.
And Achab said: By whom? And he said to him: Thus saith the Lord:
begin to fight? And he said: Thou.
So he mustered the servants of the princes of the provinces, and
he found the number of two hundred and thirty-two:  and he mustered
after them the people, all the children of Israel, seven thousand:
And they went out at noon. But Benadad was drinking himself drunk
in his pavilion, and the two and thirty kings with him, who were come to
help him.
And the servants of the princes of the provinces went out first.
And he said: Whether they come for peace, take them alive: or
whether they come to fight, take them alive.
So the servants of the princes of the provinces went out, and the
rest of the army followed:
And every one slew the man that came against him: and the Syrians
fled, and Israel pursued after them.  And Benadad, king of Syria, fled
away on horseback with his horsemen.
But the king of Israel going out overthrew the horses and
chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.
(And a prophet coming to the king of Israel, said to him: Go, and
strengthen thyself, and know, and see what thou dost: for the next year
the king of Syria will come up against thee.)
But the servants of the king of Syria said to him: Their gods are
gods of the hills, therefore they have overcome us: but it is better
that we should fight against them in the plains, and we shall overcome
them.
Do thou, therefore, this thing: Remove all the kings from thy
army, and put captains in their stead:
And make up the number of soldiers that have been slain of thine,
and horses, according to the former horses, and chariots, according to
the chariots which thou hadst before: and we will fight against them in
the plains, and thou shalt see that we shall overcome them. He believed
their counsel, and did so.
Wherefore, at the return of the year, Benadad mustered the
And the children of Israel were mustered, and taking victuals,
went out on the other side, and encamped over against them, like two
little flocks of goats: but the Syrians filled the land.
(And a man of God coming, said to the king of Israel: Thus saith
the Lord:  Because the Syrians have said: The Lord is God of the hills,
but is not God of the valleys: I will deliver all this great multitude
into thy hand, and you shall know that I am the Lord.)
And both sides set their armies in array one against the other
seven days, and on the seventh day the battle was fought: and the
children of Israel slew, of the Syrians, a hundred thousand footmen in
one day.
And they that remained fled to Aphec, into the city: and the wall
fell upon seven and twenty thousand men, that were left.  And Benadad
fleeing, went into the city, into a chamber that was within a chamber.
And his servants said to him: Behold, we have heard that the
kings of the house of Israel are merciful; so let us put sackcloths on
our loins, and ropes on our heads, and go out to the king of Israel:
perhaps he will save our lives.
So they girded sackcloths on their loins, and put ropes on their
heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said to him: Thy servant,
be yet alive, he is my brother.
The men took this for good luck: and in haste caught the word out
of his mouth, and said: Thy brother Benadad. And he said to them: Go,
and bring him to me. Then Benadad came out to him, and he lifted him up
into his chariot.
And he said to him: The cities which my father took from thy
father, I will restore: and do thou make thee streets in Damascus, as my
father made in Samaria and having made a league, I will depart from
thee. So he made a league with him, and let him go.
Then a certain man of the sons of the prophets, said to his
companion, in the word of the Lord: Strike me. But he would not strike.
Then he said to him: Because thou wouldst not hearken to the word
of the Lord, behold thou shalt depart from me, and a lion shall slay
thee.  And when he was gone a little from him, a lion found him, and
slew him.
Then he found another man, and said to him: Strike me. And he
struck him and wounded him.
So the prophet went, and met the king in the way, and disguised
himself by sprinkling dust on his face and his eyes.
And as the king passed by, he cried to the king, and said: Thy
servant went out to fight hand to hand: and when a certain man was run
away, one brought him to me, and said: Keep this man: and if he shall
slip away, thy life shall be for his life, or thou shalt pay a talent of
silver.
And whilst I, in the hurry, turned this way and that, on a sudden
he was not to be seen. And the king of Israel said to him: This is thy
judgment, which thyself hast decreed.
But he forthwith wiped off the dust from his face, and the king
of Israel knew him, that he was one of the prophets.
And he said to him: Thus saith the Lord. Because thou hast let go
out of thy hand a man worthy of death, thy life shall be for his life,
and thy people for his people.
And the king of Israel returned to his house, slighting to hear,
and raging came into Samaria.
commandment, falsely accused and stoned to death. For which crime Elias
denounceth to Achab the judgments of God: upon his humbling himself the
sentence is mitigated.
And after these things, Naboth the Jezrahelite, who was in
And Achab spoke to Naboth, saying: Give me thy vineyard, that I
may make me a garden of herbs, because it is nigh, and adjoining to my
house; and I will give thee for it a better vineyard: or if thou think
it more convenient for thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.
Naboth answered him: The Lord be merciful to me, and not let me
give thee the inheritance of my fathers.
And Achab came into his house angry and fretting, because of the
word that Naboth, the Jezrahelite, had spoken to him, saying: I will not
give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And casting himself upon his
bed, he turned away his face to the wall, and would eat no bread.
And Jezabel, his wife, went in to him, and said to him: What is
the matter that thy soul is so grieved?  and why eatest thou no bread?
And he answered her: I spoke to Naboth, the Jezrahelite, and said
to him:  Give me thy vineyard, and take money for it: or if it please
thee, I will give thee a better vineyard for it. And he said: I will not
give thee my vineyard.
Then Jezabel, his wife, said to him. Thou art of great authority
indeed, and governest well the kingdom of Israel.  Arise, and eat bread,
and be of good cheer; I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth, the
So she wrote letters in Achab's name, and sealed them with his
ring, and sent them to the ancients, and the chief men that were in his
city, and that dwelt with Naboth.
And this was the tenor of the letters: Proclaim a fast, and make
And suborn two men, sons of Belial, against him, and let them
bear false witness; that he hath blasphemed God and the king: and then
carry him out, and stone him, and so let him die.
And the men of his city, the ancients and nobles, that dwelt with
him in the city, did as Jezabel had commanded them, and as it was
written in the letters which she had sent to them;
They proclaimed a fast, and made Naboth sit among the chief of
the people.
And bringing two men, sons of the devil, they made them sit
against him: and they, like men of the devil, bore witness against him
before the people: saying: Naboth hath blasphemed God and the king.
death.
And they sent to Jezabel, saying: Naboth is stoned, and is dead.
And it came to pass, when Jezabel heard that Naboth was stoned,
and dead, that she said to Achab: Arise, and take possession of the
vineyard of Naboth, the Jezrahelite, who would not agree with thee, and
give it thee for money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead.
And when Achab heard this, to wit, that Naboth was dead, he
arose, and went down into the vineyard of Naboth, the Jezrahelite, to
take possession of it.
And the word of the Lord came to Elias, the Thesbite, saying:
Arise, and go down to meet Achab, king of Israel, who is in
possession of it:
And thou shalt speak to him, saying: Thus saith the Lord: Thou
hast slain: moreover also thou hast taken possession.  And after these
words thou shalt add: Thus saith the Lord: In this place, wherein the
dogs have licked the blood of Naboth, they shall lick thy blood also.
And Achab said to Elias: Hast thou found me thy enemy?  He said:
if thou hadst sold thyself to the devil, to be his slave to work all
kinds of evil.
Behold I will bring evil upon thee, and I will cut down thy
posterity, and I will kill of Achab him that pisseth against the wall,
and him that is shut up, and the last in Israel.
And I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of
done to provoke me to anger, and for making Israel to sin.
 And of Jezabel also, the Lord spoke, saying: The dogs shall eat
If Achab die in the city, the dogs shall eat him: but if he die
in the field, the birds of the air shall eat him.
Now, there was not such another as Achab, who was sold to do evil
in the sight of the Lord: for his wife, Jezabel, set him on,
And he became abominable, insomuch that he followed the idols
which the Amorrhites had made, whom the Lord destroyed before the face
of the children of Israel.
And when Achab had heard these words, he rent his garments, and
put haircloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and slept in sackcloth, and
walked with his head cast down.
And the word of the Lord came to Elias, the Thesbite, saying:
Hast thou not seen Achab humbled before me? therefore, because he
hath humbled himself, for my sake, I will not bring the evil in his
days, but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.
his son Joram succeedeth him.
And there passed three years without war between Syria and Israel.
And in the third year, Josaphat, king of Juda, came down to the
king of Israel.
(And the king of Israel said to his servants: Know ye not that
king of Syria?)
And he said to Josaphat: Wilt thou come with me to battle to
And Josaphat said to the king of Israel: As I am, so art thou: my
people and thy people are one: and my horsemen are thy horsemen. And
the word of the Lord.
Then the king of Israel assembled the prophets, about four hundred
men, and he said to them: Shall I go to Ramoth Galaad to fight, or shall
hand of the king.
And Josaphat said: Is there not here some prophet of the Lord,
that we may inquire by him?
And the king of Israel said to Josaphat. There is one man left, by
whom we may inquire of the Lord; Micheas, the son of Jemla: but I hate
him, for he doth not prophecy good to me, but evil. And Josaphat said:
Then the king of Israel called an eunuch, and said to him: Make
haste, and bring hither Micheas, the son of Jemla.
And the king of Israel, and Josaphat, king of Juda, sat each on
his throne, clothed with royal robes, in a court, by the entrance of the
gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophesied before them.
And Sedecias, the son of Chanaana, made himself horns of iron,
and said: Thus saith the Lord: With these shalt thou push Syria, till
thou destroy it.
And all the prophets prophesied in like manner, saying: Go up to
hands.
And the messenger that went to call Micheas, spoke to him,
saying: Behold the words of the prophets with one mouth declare good
things to the king: let thy word, therefore, be like to theirs, and
speak that which is good.
But Micheas said to him: As the Lord liveth, whatsoever the Lord
shall say to me, that will I speak.
So he came to the king, and the king said to him: Micheas, shall
we go to Ramoth Galaad to battle, or shall we forbear?  He answered him:
flattering speeches of the false prophets: and so the king understood
it, as appears by his adjuring Micheas, in the following verse, to tell
him the truth in the name of the Lord.
But the king said to him: I adjure thee again and again, that
thou tell me nothing but that which is true, in the name of the Lord.
And he said: I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills, like
sheep that have no shepherd; and the Lord said: These have no master:
let every man of them return to his house in peace.
(Then the king of Israel said to Josaphat: Did I not tell thee,
that he prophesieth no good to me, but always evil?)
And he added and said: Hear thou, therefore, the word of the
standing by him on the right hand and on the left:
And the Lord said: Who shall deceive Achab, king of Israel, that
he may go up, and fall at Ramoth Galaad? And one spoke words of this
manner, and another otherwise.
are we to suppose that things pass in heaven in the manner here
described: but this representation was made to the prophet, to be
delivered by him in a manner adapted to the common ways and notions of
men.
And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and
said: I will deceive him. And the Lord said to him: By what means?
And he said: I will go forth, and be a lying spirit, in the mouth
of all his prophets. And the Lord said: Thou shalt deceive him, and
shalt prevail: go forth, and do so.
never ordaineth lies; though he often permitteth the lying spirit to
deceive those who love not the truth. 2 Thess. 2.10. And in this sense
it is said in the following verse, The Lord hath given a lying spirit in
the mouth of all thy prophets.
Now, therefore, behold the Lord hath given a lying spirit in the
mouth of all thy prophets that are here, and the Lord hath spoken evil
against thee.
And Sedecias, the son of Chanaana, came, and struck Micheas on
the cheek, and said: Hath then the spirit of the Lord left me, and
spoken to thee?
And Micheas said: Thou shalt see in the day when thou shalt go
into a chamber within a chamber to hide thyself.
slain, and justly apprehended that he should be punished for his false
prophecy.
And the king of Israel said: Take Micheas and let him abide with
And tell them: Thus saith the king: Put this man in prison, and
feed him with bread of affliction, and water of distress till I return
in peace.
And Micheas said: If thou return in peace, the Lord hath not
spoken by me. And he said: Hear, all ye people.
So the king of Israel, and Josaphat, king of Juda, went up to
And the king of Israel said to Josaphat: Take thy armour, and go
into the battle, and put on thy own garments.  But the king of Israel
changed his dress, and went into the battle.
And the king of Syria had commanded the two and thirty captains
of the chariots, saying: You shall not fight against any, small or
great, but against the king of Israel only.
So when the captains of the chariots saw Josaphat, they suspected
that he was the king of Israel, and making a violent assault, they
fought against him: and Josaphat cried out.
And the captains of the chariots perceived that he was not the
king of Israel, and they turned away from him.
And a certain man bent his bow, shooting at a venture, and
chanced to strike the king of Israel, between the lungs and the stomach.
out of the army, for I am grievously wounded.
And the battle was fought that day, and the king of Israel stood
in his chariot against the Syrians, and he died in the evening: and the
blood ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.
And the herald proclaimed through all the army, before the sun
set, saying: Let every man return to his own city, and to his own
country.
And the king died, and was carried into Samaria: and they buried
the king in Samaria.
And they washed his chariot in the pool of Samaria and the dogs
licked up his blood, and they washed the reins according to the word of
the Lord which he had spoken.
But the rest of the acts of Achab, and all that he did, and the
house of ivory that he made, and all the cities that he built, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
So Achab slept with his fathers; and Ochozias, his son, reigned
in his stead.
But Josaphat, the son of Asa, began to reign over Juda, in the
fourth year of Acbab, king of Israel.
He was five and thirty years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned five and twenty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was
And he walked in all the way of Asa, his father, and he declined
not from it: and he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord.
Nevertheless, he took not away the high places for as yet the
people offered sacrifice, and burnt incense in the high places.
which they worshipped the true God: but took away all others, 2 Par.
17.6, and note ver. 14 of chap. 15. 3 Kings.
And Josaphat had peace with the king of Israel.
But the rest of the acts of Josaphat, and his works which he did,
and his battles, are they not written in the book of the words of the
days of the kings of Juda?
And the remnant also of the effeminate, who remained in the days
of Asa, his father, he took out of the land.
And there was then no king appointed in Edom.
But king Josaphat made navies on the sea, to sail into Ophir for
gold: but they could not go, for the ships were broken in Asiongaber.
Then Ochozias, the son of Achab, said to Josaphat: Let my
servants go with thy servants in the ships.  And Josaphat would not.
partner: and therefore would have no more to do with him.
And Josaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in
the city of David, his father: and Joram, his son, reigned in his stead.
And Ochozias, the son of Achab, began to reign over Israel, in
reigned over Israel two years.
And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way
of his father and his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam, the son of
He served also Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked the Lord,
the God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.
causeth fire to come down from heaven, upon two captains and their
companies.
And Moab rebelled against Israel, after the death of Achab.
And Ochozias fell through the lattices of his upper chamber, which
he had in Samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, saying to them:
this my illness.
And an angel of the Lord spoke to Elias, the Thesbite, saying:
to them: Is there not a God in Israel, that ye go to consult Beelzebub,
the god of Accaron?
Wherefore, thus saith the Lord: From the bed, on which thou art
gone up, thou shalt not come down, but thou shalt surely die. And Elias
went away.
And the messengers turned back to Ochozias. And he said to them:
But they answered him: A man met us, and said to us: Go, and return
to the king, that sent you, and you shall say to him: Thus saith the
the bed, on which thou art gone up, but thou shalt surely die.
And he said to them: What manner of man was he who met you, and
spoke these words?
But they said: A hairy man, with a girdle of leather about his
loins. And he said: It is Elias, the Thesbite.
And he sent to him a captain of fifty, and the fifty men that were
under him. And he went up to him, and as he was sitting on the top of a
hill, he said to him: Man of God, the king hath commanded that thou come
down.
And Elias answering, said to the captain of fifty: If I be a man
of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume thee, and thy fifty.
that were with him.
these captains, who came to apprehend him; not out of a desire to
gratify any private passion; but to punish the insult offered to
religion, to confirm his mission, and to shew how vain are the efforts
of men against God, and his servants, whom he willeth to protect.
And he again sent to him another captain of fifty men, and his
fifty with him. And he said to him: Man of God: Thus saith the king:
Elias answering, said: If I be a man of God, let fire come down
from heaven, and consume thee, and thy fifty. And fire came down from
heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.
Again he sent a third captain of fifty men, and the fifty that
were with him. And when he was come, he fell upon his knees before
the lives of thy servants that are with me.
Behold fire came down from heaven, and consumed the two first
captains of fifty men, and the fifties that were with them: but now I
beseech thee to spare my life.
And the angel of the Lord spoke to Elias, saying: Go down with
him, fear not. He arose therefore, and went down with him to the king,
And said to him: Thus saith the Lord: Because thou hast sent
messengers to consult Beelzebub, the god of Accaron, as though there
were not a God in Israel, of whom thou mightest inquire the word;
therefore, from the bed on which thou art gone up, thou shalt not come
down, but thou shalt surely die.
So he died, according to the word of the Lord, which Elias spoke;
and Joram, his brother, reigned in his stead, in the second year of
associated to the throne by his father Josaphat.
But the rest of the acts of Ochozias, which he did, are they not
written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
spirit is given to Eliseus. Eliseus healeth the waters by casting in
salt. Boys are torn by bears for mocking Eliseus.
And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elias, into
heaven, by a whirlwind, that Elias and Eliseus were going from Galgal.
regions.
And Elias said to Eliseus: Stay thou here, because the Lord hath
sent me as far as Bethel. And Eliseus said to him: As the Lord liveth,
and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And when they were come
down to Bethel,
The sons of the prophets, that were at Bethel, came forth to
take away thy master from thee? And he answered: I also know it: hold
your peace.
seem to have had their schools, like colleges or communities, in Bethel,
And Elias said to Eliseus: Stay here, because the Lord hath sent me
to Jericho. And he said: As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I
will not leave thee.  And when they were come to Jericho,
The sons of the prophets, that were at Jericho, came to Eliseus,
and said to him: Dost thou know that, this day, the Lord will take away
thy master from thee? And he said: I also know it: hold your peace.
And Elias said to him: Stay here, because the Lord hath sent me as
far as the Jordan. And he said: as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul
liveth, I will not leave thee. And they two went on together.
And fifty men, of the sons of the prophets, followed them, and
stood in sight, at a distance: but they two stood by the Jordan.
And Elias took his mantle, and folded it together, and struck the
waters, and they were divided hither and thither, and they both passed
over on dry ground.
And when they were gone over, Elias said to Eliseus: Ask what thou
wilt have me to do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And
heir: or thy spirit which is double in comparison of that which God
usually imparteth to his prophets.
And he answered: Thou hast asked a hard thing; nevertheless, if
thou see me when I am taken from thee, thou shalt have what thou hast
asked: but if thou see me not, thou shalt not have it.
And as they went on, walking and talking together, behold, a fiery
chariot and fiery horses parted them both asunder: and Elias went up by
a whirlwind into heaven.
And Eliseus saw him, and cried: My father, my father, the chariot
of Israel, and the driver thereof.  And he saw him no more: and he took
hold of his own garments, and rent them in two pieces.
And he took up the mantle of Elias, that fell from him: and going
back, he stood on the bank of the Jordan;
And he struck the waters with the mantle of Elias, that had fallen
from him, and they were not divided.  And he said: Where is now the God
of Elias? And he struck the waters, and they were divided hither and
thither, and Eliseus passed over.
And the sons of the prophets, at Jericho, who were over against
him, seeing it, said: The spirit of Elias hath rested upon Eliseus. And
coming to meet him, they worshipped him, falling to the ground.
not for any temporal, but spiritual excellency.
And they said to him: Behold, there are with thy servants, fifty
strong men, that can go, and seek thy master, lest, perhaps, the spirit
of the Lord, hath taken him up and cast him upon some mountain, or into
some valley. And he said: Do not send.
But they pressed him, till he consented, and said: Send. And they
sent fifty men: and they sought three days, but found him not.
And they came back to him: for he abode at Jericho, and he said to
them: Did I not say to you?  Do not send.
And the men of the city said to Eliseus: Behold the situation of
this city is very good, as thou, my lord, seest: but the waters are very
bad, and the ground barren.
And he said: Bring me a new vessel, and put salt into it. And when
they had brought it,
He went out to the spring of the waters, and cast the salt into
it, and said: Thus saith the Lord: I have healed these waters, and there
shall be no more in them death or barrenness.
And the waters were healed unto this day, according to the word of
And he went up from thence to Bethel: and as he was going up by
the way, little boys came out of the city and mocked him, saying: Go up,
thou bald head, go up, thou bald head.
And looking back, he saw them, and cursed them in the name of the
them, two and forty boys.
of God, was not the effect of passion, or of a desire of revenging
himself; but of zeal for religion, which was insulted by these boys, in
the person of the prophet; and of a divine inspiration: God punishing in
this manner the inhabitants of Bethel, (the chief seat of the calf
worship,) who had trained up their children in a prejudice against the
true religion and its ministers.
And from thence he went to mount Carmel, and from thence he
returned to Samaria.
victory. The king of Moab is overthrown, his city is besieged: he
sacrificeth his firstborn son: so the Israelites raise the siege.
And Joram the son of Achab, reigned over Israel, in Samaria, in the
eighteenth year of Josaphat, king of Juda. And he reigned twelve years.
And he did evil before the Lord, but not like his father and his
mother: for he took away the statues of Baal, which his father had made.
Nevertheless, he stuck to the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat,
who made Israel to sin, nor did he depart from them.
Now Mesa, king of Moab, nourished many sheep, and he paid to the
king of Israel a hundred thousand lambs, and a hundred thousand rams,
with their fleeces.
And when Achab was dead, he broke the league which he had made with
the king of Israel.
And king Joram went out that day from Samaria, and mustered all
And he sent to Josaphat; king of Juda, saying: The king of Moab is
revolted from me: come with me against him to battle. And he answered: I
will come up: he that is mine, is thine: my people are thy people: and
my horses, thy horses.
And he said: Which way shall we go up? But he answered: By the
desert of Edom.
So the king of Israel, and the king of Juda, and the king of Edom,
went, and they fetched a compass of seven days journey, and there was no
water for the army, and for the beasts, that followed them.
And the king of Israel said: Alas, alas, alas, the Lord hath
gathered us three kings together, to deliver us into the hands of Moab.
And Josaphat said: Is there not here a prophet of the Lord, that
we may beseech the Lord by him?  And one of the servants of the king of
the hands of Elias.
And Josaphat said: The word of the Lord is with him. And the king
of Israel, and Josaphat, king of Juda, and the king of Edom, went down
to him.
And Eliseus said to the king of Israel: What have I to do with
thee? go to the prophets of thy father, and thy mother. And the king of
kings, to deliver them into the hands of Moab?
And Eliseus said to him: As the Lord of hosts liveth, in whose
sight I stand, if I did not reverence the face of Josaphat, king of
But now bring me hither a minstrel. And when the minstrel played,
the hand of the Lord came upon him, and he said:
Thus saith the Lord: Make the channel of this torrent full of
ditches.
For thus saith the Lord: You shall not see wind, nor rain: and yet
this channel shall be filled with waters, and you shall drink, you and
your families, and your beasts.
And this is a small thing in the sight of the Lord: moreover, he
will deliver, also, Moab into your hands.
And you shall destroy every fenced city, and every choice city,
and shall cut down every fruitful tree, and shall stop up all the
springs of waters, and every goodly field you shall cover with stones.
And it came to pass, in the morning, when the sacrifices used to
be offered, that behold, water came by the way of Edom, and the country
was filled with water.
And all the Moabites hearing that the kings were come up to fight
against them, gathered together all that were girded with a belt upon
them, and stood in the borders.
And they rose early in the morning, and the sun being now up, and
shining upon the waters, the Moabites saw the waters over against them
red, like blood,
And they said: It is the blood of the sword: the kings have fought
among themselves, and they have killed one another: go now, Moab, to the
spoils.
And they went into the camp of Israel: but Israel rising up,
defeated Moab, who fled before them. And they being conquerors, went and
smote Moab.
And they destroyed the cities: And they filled every goodly field,
every man casting his stone: and they stopt up all the springs of
waters: and cut down all the trees that bore fruit, so that brick walls
only remained: and the city was beset by the slingers, and a great part
thereof destroyed.
of the Moabites. In Hebrew, Kir-Haraseth.
And when the king of Moab saw this, to wit, that the enemies had
prevailed, he took with him seven hundred men that drew the sword, to
break in upon the king of Edom: but they could not.
Then he took his eldest son, that should have reigned in his
stead, and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall: and there was
great indignation in Israel, and presently they departed from him, and
returned into their own country.
Now a certain woman of the wives of the prophets, cried to Eliseus,
saying: Thy servant, my husband, is dead, and thou knowest that thy
servant was one that feared God, and behold the creditor is come to take
away my two sons to serve him.
And Eliseus said to her: What wilt thou have me do for thee? Tell
me, what hast thou in thy house?  And she answered: I, thy handmaid,
have nothing in my house but a little oil, to anoint me.
And he said to her: Go, borrow of all thy neighbours empty vessels,
not a few.
And go in, and shut thy door, when thou art within, and thy sons:
and pour out thereof into all those vessels: and when they are full,
take them away.
So the woman went, and shut the door upon her, and upon her sons:
they brought her the vessels, and she poured in.
And when the vessels were full, she said to her son: Bring me yet a
vessel. And he answered: I have no more. And the oil stood.
And she came, and told the man of God. And he said: Go, sell the
oil, and pay thy creditor: and thou and thy sons live of the rest.
And there was a day when Eliseus passed by Sunam: now there was a
great woman there, who detained him to eat bread: and as he passed often
that way, he turned into her house to eat bread.
And she said to her husband: I perceive that this is a holy man of
Let us, therefore, make him a little chamber, and put a little bed
in it for him, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick, that when he
cometh to us he may abide there.
Now, there was a certain day, when he came, and turned into the
chamber, and rested there.
And he said to Giezi, his servant: Call this Sunamitess.  And when
he had called her, and she stood before him,
He said to his servant: Say to her: Behold, thou hast diligently
served us in all things; what wilt thou have me to do for thee? Hast
thou any business, and wilt thou, that I speak to the king, or to the
general of the army? And she answered: I dwell in the midst of my own
people.
And he said: What will she then that I do for her? And Giezi said:
Then he bid him call her. And when she was called, and stood
before the door,
He said to her: At this time, and this same hour, if life be in
company, thou shalt have a son in thy womb. But she answered: Do not, I
beseech thee, my lord, thou man of God, do not lie to thy handmaid.
And the woman conceived, and brought forth a son in the time, and
at the same hour that Eliseus had said.
And the child grew. And on a certain day, when he went out to his
father to the reapers,
He said to his father: My head acheth, my head acheth. But he said
to his servant. Take him, and carry him to his mother.
And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, she sat
him on her knees, until noon, and then he died.
And she went up, and laid him upon the bed of the man of God, and
shut the door: and going out,
She called her husband, and said: Send with me, I beseech thee,
one of thy servants, and an ass, that I may run to the man of God, and
come again.
And he said to her: Why dost thou go to him?  to day is neither
new moon nor sabbath. She answered: I will go.
And she saddled an ass, and commanded her servant: Drive, and make
haste, make no stay in going: And do that which I bid thee.
So she went forward, and came to the man of God, to mount Carmel:
and when the man of God saw her coming towards, he said to Giezi, his
servant: Behold that Sunamitess.
Go, therefore, to meet her, and say to her: Is all well with thee,
and with thy husband, and with thy son? And she answered: Well.
And when she came to the man of God, to the mount, she caught hold
on his feet: and Giezi came to remove her. And the man of God said: Let
her alone for her soul is in anguish, and the Lord hath hid it from me,
and hath not told me.
And she said to him: Did I ask a son of my lord?  did I not say to
thee: Do not deceive me?
Then he said to Giezi: Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thy
hand, and go. If any man meet thee, salute him not: and if any man
salute thee, answer him not: and lay my staff upon the face of the
child.
spiritually dead, must not suffer himself to be called off, or diverted
from his enterprise, by the salutations or ceremonies of the world.
But the mother of the child said: As the Lord liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. He arose, therefore, and followed
her.
But Giezi was gone before them, and laid the staff upon the face
of the child, and there was no voice nor sense: and he returned to meet
him, and told him, saying: The child is not risen.
prophet Eliseus, thus: By the staff sent by his servant is figured the
rod of Moses, or the Old Law, which was not sufficient to bring mankind
to life then dead in sin. It was necessary that Christ himself should
come, and by taking on human nature, become flesh of our flesh, and
restore us to life. In this Eliseus was a figure of Christ, as it was
necessary that he should come himself to bring the dead child to life
and restore him to his mother, who is here, in a mystical sense, a
figure of the Church.
Eliseus, therefore, went into the house, and behold the child lay
dead on his bed:
And going in, he shut the door upon him, and upon the child, and
prayed to the Lord.
And he went up, and lay upon the child: and put his mouth upon his
mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands: and he
bowed himself upon him, and the child's flesh grew warm.
Then he returned and walked in the house, once to and fro: and he
went up, and lay upon him: and the child gaped seven times, and opened
his eyes.
And he called Giezi, and said to him: Call this Sunamitess. And
she being called, went in to him: and he said: Take up thy son.
She came and fell at his feet, and worshipped upon the ground: and
took up her son, and went out.
And Eliseus returned to Galgal, and there was a famine in the
land, and the sons of the prophets dwelt before him: And he said to one
of his servants: Set on the great pot, and boil pottage for the sons of
the prophets.
And one went out into the field to gather wild herbs: and he found
something like a wild vine, and gathered of it wild gourds of the field,
and filled his mantle, and coming back, he shred them into the pot of
pottage; for he knew not what it was.
and therefore are called the gall of the earth; and are poisonous if
taken in a great quantity.
And they poured it out for their companions to eat: and when they
had tasted of the pottage, they cried out, saying: Death is in the pot,
But he said: Bring some meal. And when they had brought it, he
cast it into the pot, and said: Pour out for the people, that they may
eat. And there was now no bitterness in the pot.
And a certain man came from Baalsalisa, bringing to the man of
his scrip. And he said: Give to the people, that they may eat.
And his servant answered him: How much is this, that I should set
it before a hundred men? He said again: Give to the people, that they
may eat: for thus saith the Lord: They shall eat, and there shall be
left.
So he set it before them: and they ate, and there was left,
according to the word of the Lord.
in one God, promising to serve him. Giezi taketh gifts of Naaman, and is
struck with leprosy.
Naaman, general of the army, of the king of Syria, was a great man
with his master, and honourable: for by him the Lord gave deliverance to
Now there had gone out robbers from Syria, and had led away captive
out of the land of Israel, a little maid, and she waited upon Naaman's
wife.
And she said to her mistress: I wish my master had been with the
prophet that is in Samaria: he would certainly have healed him of the
leprosy which he hath.
Then Naaman went in to his lord, and told him, saying: Thus and
thus said the girl from the land of Israel.
And the king of Syria said to him: Go; and I will send a letter to
the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with him ten talents of
silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment;
And brought the letter to the king of Israel, in these words: When
thou shalt receive this letter, know that I have sent to thee Naaman, my
servant, that thou mayst heal him of his leprosy.
And when the king of Israel had read the letter, he rent his
garments, and said: Am I God, to be able to kill and give life, that
this man hath sent to me to heal a man of his leprosy? mark, and see how
he seeketh occasions against me.
And when Eliseus, the man of God, had heard this, to wit, that the
king of Israel had rent his garments, he sent to him, saying: Why hast
thou rent thy garments?  let him come to me, and let him know that there
is a prophet in Israel.
So Naaman came with his horses and chariots, and stood at the door
of the house of Eliseus:
And Eliseus sent a messenger to him, saying: Go, and wash seven
times in the Jordan, and thy flesh shall recover health, and thou shalt
be clean.
Naaman was angry, and went away, saying: I thought he would have
come out to me, and standing, would have invoked the name of the Lord
his God, and touched with his hand the place of the leprosy, and healed
me.
Are not the Abana, and the Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better
than all the waters of Israel, that I may wash in them, and be made
clean? So as he turned, and was going away with indignation,
His servants came to him, and said to him: Father, if the prophet
had bid thee do some great thing, surely thou shouldst have done it: how
much rather what he now hath said to thee: Wash, and thou shalt be
clean?
Then he went down, and washed in the Jordan seven times, according
to the word of the man of God; and his flesh was restored, like the
flesh of a little child: and he was made clean.
And returning to the man of God, with all his train, he came, and
stood before him, and said: In truth, I know there is no other God, in
all the earth, but only in Israel: I beseech thee, therefore, take a
blessing of thy servant.
But he answered: As the Lord liveth, before whom I stand, I will
receive none. And when he pressed him, he still refused.
And Naaman said: As thou wilt: but I beseech thee, grant to me,
thy servant, to take from hence two mules' burden of earth: for thy
servant will not henceforth offer holocaust, or victim, to other gods,
but to the Lord.
But there is only this, for which thou shalt entreat the Lord for
thy servant; when my master goeth into the temple of Remmon, to worship
there, and he leaneth on my hand: if I bow down in the temple of Remmon,
when he boweth down in the same place, that the Lord pardon me, thy
servant, for this thing.
And he said to him: Go in peace. So he departed from him, in the
spring time of the earth.
conformity to an idolatrous worship; but only a service which by his
office he owed to his master: who on all public occasions leaned on him:
so that his bowing down when his master bowed himself down was not in
effect adoring the idols: nor was it so understood by the standers by,
since he publicly professed himself a worshipper of the only true and
living God, but it was no more than doing a civil office to the king his
master, whose leaning upon him obliged him to bow at the same time that
he bowed.
But Giezi, the servant of the man of God, said: My master hath
spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving of him that which he
brought: as the Lord liveth, I will run after him, and take something of
him.
And Giezi followed after Naaman: and when he saw him running after
him, he leapt down from his chariot to meet him, and said: Is all well?
And he said: Well: my master hath sent me to thee, saying: Just
now there are come to me from mount Ephraim, two young men of the sons
of the prophets: give them a talent of silver, and two changes of
garments.
And Naaman said: It is better that thou take two talents. And he
forced him, and bound two talents of silver in two bags, and two changes
of garments, and laid them upon two of his servants, and they carried
them before him.
And when he was come, and now it was the evening, he took them
from their hands, and laid them up in the house, and sent the men away,
and they departed.
But he went in, and stood before his master. And Eliseus said:
But he said: Was not my heart present, when the man turned back,
from his chariot, to meet thee?  So now thou hast received money, and
received garments, to buy oliveyards and vineyards, and sheep, and oxen,
and men-servants, and maid-servants.
But the leprosy of Naaman, shall also stick to thee, and to thy
seed for ever. And he went out from him a leper, as white as snow.
were sent to apprehend him into Samaria, where there eyes being opened,
they are courteously entertained. The Syrians besiege Samaria: the
famine there causeth a woman to eat her own child. Upon this the king
commandeth Eliseus to be put to death.
And the sons of the prophets said to Eliseus: Behold, the place
where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.
Let us go as far as the Jordan, and take out of the wood every man
a piece of timber, that we may build us there a place to dwell in. And
he said: Go.
And one of them said: But come thou also with thy servants. He
answered: I will come.
So he went with them. And when they were come to the Jordan, they
cut down wood.
And it happened, as one was felling some timber, that the head of
the ax fell into the water: and he cried out, and said: Alas, alas,
alas, my lord, for this same was borrowed.
And the man of God said: Where did it fall? and he shewed him the
place: Then he cut off a piece of wood, and cast it in thither: and the
iron swam.
And he said: Take it up. And he put out his hand, and took it.
And the king of Syria warred against Israel, and took counsel with
his servants, saying: In such and such a place, let us lay an ambush.
And the man of God sent to the king of Israel, saying: Beware that
thou pass not to such a place: for the Syrians are there in ambush.
And the king of Israel, sent to the place which the man of God had
told him, and prevented him, and looked well to himself there not once
nor twice.
And the heart of the king of Syria, was troubled for this thing.
it is that betrays me to the king of Israel?
And one of his servants said: No one, my lord, O king: but
the words, that thou speakest in thy privy chamber.
And he said to them: Go, and see where he is: that I may send and
take him. And they told him: saying: Behold he is in Dothan.
Therefore, he sent thither horses, and chariots, and the strength
of an army: and they came by night, and beset the city.
And the servant of the man of God, rising early went out, and saw
an army round about the city, and horses and chariots: and he told him,
saying: Alas, alas, alas, my lord, what shall we do?
But he answered: Fear not: for there are more with us than with
them.
And Eliseus prayed, and said: Lord, open his eyes, that he may
see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the servant, and he saw: and
behold, the mountain was full of horses, and chariots of fire round
about Eliseus.
And the enemies came down to him: but Eliseus prayed to the Lord,
saying: Strike, I beseech thee, this people with blindness: and the Lord
struck them with blindness, according to the word of Eliseus.
which hindered them from seeing the objects that were really before
them; and represented other different objects to their imagination: so
that they no longer perceived the city of Dothan, nor were able to know
the person of Eliseus; but were easily led by him, whom they took to be
another man, to Samaria. So that he truly told them, this is not the
way, neither is this the city, etc., because he spoke with relation to
the way and to the city, which was represented to them.
And Eliseus said to them: This is not the way, neither is this the
city: follow me, and I will shew you the man whom you seek. So he led
them into Samaria.
And when they were come into Samaria, Eliseus said: Lord, open the
eyes of these men, that they may see. And the Lord opened their eyes,
and they saw themselves to be in the midst of Samaria.
And the king of Israel said to Eliseus, when he saw them: My
father, shall I kill them?
And he said: Thou shalt not kill them: for thou didst not take
them with thy sword, or thy bow, that thou mayst kill them: but set
bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to
their master.
And a great provision of meats was set before them, and they ate
and drank; and he let them go: and they went away to their master: and
the robbers of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.
And it came to pass, after these things, that Benadad, king of
And there was a great famine in Samaria: and so long did the siege
continue, till the head of an ass was sold for fourscore pieces of
silver, and the fourth part of a cabe of pigeons' dung, for five pieces
of silver.
And as the king of Israel was passing by the wall, a certain woman
cried out to him, saying: Save me, my lord, O king.
And he said: If the Lord doth not save thee, how can I save thee?
out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress? And the king said to her:
This woman said to me: Give thy son, that we may eat him today,
and we will eat my son tomorrow.
So we boiled my son, and ate him. And I said to her on the next
day: Give thy son, that we may eat him. And she hath hid her son.
When the king heard this, he rent his garments, and passed by upon
the wall. And all the people saw the haircloth which he wore within next
to his flesh.
And the king said: May God do so and so to me, and may he add
more, if the head of Eliseus, the son of Saphat, shall stand on him this
day.
But Eliseus sat in his house, and the ancients sat with him. So he
sent a man before: and before that messenger came, he said to the
ancients: Do you know that this son of a murderer hath sent to cut off
my head? Look then when the messenger shall come, shut the door, and
suffer him not to come in: for behold the sound of his master's feet is
behind him.
While he was yet speaking to them, the messenger appeared, who was
coming to him. And he said: Behold, so great an evil is from the Lord:
what shall I look for more from the Lord?
sudden flight of the Syrians; of which four lepers bring the news to the
city. The incredulous nobleman is trod to death.
And Eliseus said: Hear ye the word of the Lord: Thus saith the
for a stater, and two bushels of barley for a stater, in the gate of
Then one of the lords, upon whose hand the king leaned, answering
the man of God, said: If the Lord should make flood-gates in heaven, can
that possibly be which thou sayest? And he said: Thou shalt see it with
thy eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.
Now there were four lepers, at the entering in of the gate: and
they said one to another: What mean we to stay here till we die?
If we will enter into the city, we shall die with the famine: and
if we will remain here, we must also die: come therefore, and let us run
over to the camp of the Syrians. If they spare us, we shall live: but if
they kill us, we shall but die.
So they arose in the evening, to go to the Syrian camp. And when
they were come to the first part of the camp of the Syrians, they found
no man there.
For the Lord had made them hear, in the camp of Syria, the noise of
chariots, and of horses, and of a very great army: and they said one to
another: Behold, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of
the Hethites, and of the Egyptians; and they are come upon us.
Wherefore they arose, and fled away in the dark, and left their
tents, and their horses and asses in the camp, and fled, desiring to
save their lives.
So when these lepers were come to the beginning of the camp, they
went into one tent, and ate and drank: and they took from thence silver,
and gold, and raiment, and went, and hid it: and they came again, and
went into another tent, and carried from thence in like manner, and hid
it.
Then they said one to another: We do not well: for this is a day of
good tidings. If we hold our peace, and do not tell it till the morning,
we shall be charged with a crime: come, let us go, and tell it in the
king's court.
So they came to the gate of the city, and told them, saying: We
went to the camp of the Syrians, and we found no man there, but horses,
and asses tied, and the tents standing.
Then the guards of the gate went, and told it within in the king's
palace.
And he arose in the night, and said to his servants: I tell you
what the Syrians have done to us: They know that we suffer great famine,
and therefore they are gone out of the camp, and lie hid in the fields,
saying: When they come out of the city, we shall take them alive, and
then we may get into the city.
And one of his servants answered: Let us take the five horses that
are remaining in the city (because there are no more in the whole
multitude of Israel, for the rest are consumed), and let us send and
see.
They brought therefore two horses, and the king sent into the camp
of the Syrians, saying: Go, and see.
And they went after them, as far as the Jordan: and behold, all
the way was full of garments, and vessels, which the Syrians had cast
away, in their fright, and the messengers returned, and told the king.
And the people going out, pillaged the camp of the Syrians: and a
bushel of fine flour was sold for a stater, and two bushels of barley
for a stater, according to the word of the Lord.
And the king appointed that lord on whose hand he leaned, to stand
at the gate: and the people trod upon him in the entrance of the gate;
and he died, as the man of God had said, when the king came down to him.
And it came to pass, according to the word of the man of God,
which he spoke to the king, when he said: Two bushels of barley shall be
for a stater, and a bushel of fine flour for a stater, at this very time
tomorrow, in the gate of Samaria.
When that lord answered the man of God, and said: Although the
thou sayest? And he said to him: Thou shalt see it with thy eyes, and
shalt not eat thereof.
And so it fell out to him, as it was foretold, and the people trod
upon him in the gate, and he died.
home, recovereth her lands, and revenues. Eliseus foresheweth the death
of Benadad, king of Syria, and the reign of Hazael. Joram's wicked reign
in Juda. He dieth, and his son Ochozias succeedeth.
And Eliseus spoke to the woman, whose son he had restored to life,
saying: Arise, and go thou, and thy household, and sojourn wheresoever
thou canst find: for the Lord hath called a famine, and it shall come
upon the land seven years.
And she arose, and did according to the word of the man of God: and
going with her household, she sojourned in the land of the Philistines
many days.
And when the seven years were ended, the woman returned out of the
land of the Philistines, and she went forth to speak to the king for her
house and for her lands.
And the king talked with Giezi, the servant of the man of God,
saying: Tell me all the great things that Eliseus hath done.
And when he was telling the king how he had raised one dead to
life, the woman appeared, whose son he had restored to life, crying to
the king for her house, and her lands. And Giezi said: My lord, O king,
this is the woman, and this is her son, whom Eliseus raised to life.
And the king asked the woman: and she told him. And the king
appointed her an eunuch, saying: Restore her all that is hers, and all
the revenues of the lands, from the day that she left the land to this
present.
Eliseus also came to Damascus, and Benadad, king of Syria was sick;
and they told him, saying: The man of God is come hither.
And the king said to Hazael: Take with thee presents, and go to
meet the man of God, and consult the Lord by him, saying: Can I recover
of this my illness?
And Hazael went to meet him, taking with him presents, and all the
good things of Damascus, the burdens of forty camels. And when he stood
before him, he said: Thy son, Benadad, the king of Syria, hath sent me
to thee, saying: Can I recover of this my illness?
And Eliseus said to him: Go tell him: Thou shalt recover: but the
that the king's disease was not mortal: and that he would recover if no
violence were used. Or he might only express himself in this manner, by
way of giving Hazael to understand that he knew both what he would say
and do; that he would indeed tell the king he should recover; but would
be himself the instrument of his death.
And he stood with him, and was troubled so far as to blush: and
the man of God wept.
And Hazael said to him: Why doth my lord weep? And he said:
wilt kill with the sword, and thou wilt dash their children, and rip up
their pregnant women.
And Hazael said: But what am I, thy servant, a dog, that I should
do this great thing? And Eliseus said: The Lord hath shewed me that thou
shalt be king of Syria.
And when he was departed from Eliseus he came to his master, who
said to him: What said Eliseus to thee? And he answered: He told me:
And on the next day, he took a blanket, and poured water on it,
and spread it upon his face: and he died, and Hazael reigned in his
stead.
In the fifth year of Joram, son of Achab, king of Israel, and of
before his death made his son Joram king, as David had done before by
his own son Solomon.
He was two and thirty years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
And he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, as the house of
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord.
But the Lord would not destroy Juda, for David his servant's sake,
as he had promised him, to give him a light, and to his children always.
In his days Edom revolted from being under Juda, and made
themselves a king.
And Joram came to Seira, and all the chariots with him: and he
arose in the night, and defeated the Edomites that had surrounded him,
and the captains of the chariots, but the people fled into their tents.
So Edom revolted from being under Juda, unto this day. Then Lobna
also revolted at the same time.
But the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in the
city of David, and Ochozias, his son, reigned in his stead.
In the twelfth year of Joram, the son of Achab, king of Israel,
reigned Ochozias, son of Joram, king of Juda.
Ochozias was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned one year in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Athalia the
daughter of Amri king of Israel.
of Amri, ver. 18.
And he walked in the ways of the house of Achab: and he did evil
before the Lord, as did the house of Achab: for he was the son-in-law of
the house of Achab.
He went also with Joram, son of Achab, to fight against Hazael,
king of Syria, in Ramoth Galaad, and the Syrians wounded Joram:
And he went back to be healed, in Jezrahel: because the Syrians
had wounded him in Ramoth, when he fought against Hazael, king of Syria
the son of Achab, in Jezrahel, because he was sick there.
And Eliseus the prophet, called one of the sons of the prophets,
and said to him: Gird up thy loins, and take this little bottle of oil
in thy hand, and go to Ramoth Galaad.
And when thou art come thither, thou shalt see Jehu the son of
from amongst his brethren, and carry him into an inner chamber.
Then taking the little bottle of oil, thou shalt pour it on his
head, and shalt say: Thus saith the Lord: I have anointed thee king over
So the young man, the servant of the prophet, went away to Ramoth
And went in thither: and behold, the captains of the army were
sitting, and he said: I have a word to thee, O prince. And Jehu said:
And he arose, and went into the chamber: and he poured the oil upon
his head, and said: Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: I have anointed
thee king over Israel, the people of the Lord.
And thou shalt cut off the house of Achab, thy master, and I will
revenge the blood of my servants, the prophets, and the blood of all the
servants of the Lord, at the hand of Jezabel.
And I will destroy all the house of Achab, and I will cut off from
the meanest in Israel.
And I will make the house of Achab, like the house of Jeroboam, the
son of Nabat, and like the house of Baasa, the son of Ahias.
And the dogs shall eat Jezabel, in the field of Jezrahel, and
there shall be no one to bury her. And he opened the door and fled.
Then Jehu went forth to the servants of his Lord: and they said to
him: Are all things well? why came this madman to thee? And he said to
them: You know the man, and what he said.
But they answered: It is false; but rather do thou tell us. And he
said to them: Thus and thus did he speak to me: and he said: Thus saith
the Lord: I have anointed thee king over Israel.
Then they made haste, and taking every man his garment, laid it
under his feet, after the manner of a judgment seat, and they sounded
the trumpet, and said: Jehu is king.
So Jehu, the son of Josaphat, the son of Namsi, conspired against
fighting with Hazael, king of Syria:
And was returned to be healed in Jezrahel of his wounds; for the
city, lest he go, and tell in Jezrahel.
And he got up, and went into Jezrahel for Joram was sick there,
and Ochozias king of Juda, was come down to visit Joram.
The watchman therefore, that stood upon the tower of Jezrahel, saw
the troop of Jehu coming, and said: I see a troop. And Joram said: Take
a chariot, and send to meet them, and let him that goeth say: Is all
well?
So there went one in a chariot to meet him, and said: Thus saith
the king: Are all things peaceable?  And Jehu said: What hast thou to do
with peace? go behind and follow me. And the watchman told, saying: The
messenger came to them, but he returneth not.
And he sent a second chariot of horses: and he came to them, and
said: Thus saith the king: Is there peace? And Jehu said: What hast thou
to do with peace? pass, and follow me.
And the watchman told, saying: He came even to them, but returneth
not: and the driving is like the driving of Jehu, the son of Namsi; for
he drives furiously.
And Joram said: Make ready the chariot. And they made ready his
chariot: and Joram, king of Israel, and Ochozias, king of Juda, went
out, each in his chariot, and they went out to meet Jehu, and met him in
the field of Naboth, the Jezrahelite.
And when Joram saw Jehu, he said: Is there peace, Jehu? And he
answered: What peace? so long as the fornications of Jezabel, thy
mother, and her many sorceries, are in their vigour.
And Joram turned his hand, and fleeing, said to Ochozias: There is
treachery, Ochozias.
But Jehu bent his bow with his hand, and shot Joram between the
shoulders: and the arrow went out through his heart, and immediately he
fell in his chariot.
And Jehu said to Badacer, his captain: Take him, and cast him into
the field of Naboth, the Jezrahelite: for I remember, when I and thou,
sitting in a chariot, followed Achab, this man's father, that the Lord
laid this burden upon him, saying:
If I do not requite thee in this field, saith the Lord, for the
blood of Naboth, and for the blood of his children, which I saw
yesterday, saith the Lord. So now take him, and cast him into the field,
according to the word of the Lord.
But Ochozias, king of Juda, seeing this, fled by the way of the
garden house: and Jehu pursued him, and said: Strike him also in his
chariot. And they struck him in the going up to Gaver, which is by
And his servants laid him upon his chariot, and carried him to
city of David.
In the eleventh year of Joram, the son of Achab, Ochozias reigned
over Juda;
And Jehu came into Jezrahel. But Jezabel, hearing of his coming
in, painted her face with stibic stone, and adorned her head, and looked
out of a window.
At Jehu coming in at the gate, and said: Can there be peace for
And Jehu lifted up his face to the window, and said: Who is this?
And he said to them: Throw her down headlong; And they threw her
down, and the wall was sprinkled with her blood, and the hoofs of the
horses trod upon her.
And when he was come in to eat, and to drink, he said: Go, and see
after that cursed woman, and bury her; because she is a king's daughter.
And when they went to bury her, they found nothing but the skull,
and the feet, and the extremities of her hands.
And coming back they told him. And Jehu said: It is the word of
the Lord, which he spoke by his servant Elias, the Thesbite, saying: In
the field of Jezrahel the dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezabel.
And the flesh of Jezabel shall be as dung upon the face of the
earth in the field of Jezrahel; so that they who pass by shall say: Is
this that same Jezabel?
killeth the worshippers: but sticketh to the calves of Jeroboam. Israel
is afflicted by the Syrians.
And Achab had seventy sons in Samaria: so Jehu wrote letters, and
sent to Samaria, to the chief men of the city, and to the ancients, and
to them that brought up Achab's children, saying:
As soon as you receive these letters, ye that have your master's
sons, and chariots, and horses, and fenced cities, and armour,
Choose the best, and him that shall please you most of your
master's sons, and set him on his father's throne, and fight for the
house of your master.
But they were exceedingly afraid, and said: Behold two kings could
not stand before him, and how shall we be able to resist?
Therefore they that were over the king's house, and the rulers of
the city, and the ancients, and the bringers up of the children, sent to
will do; we will not make us any king: do thou all that pleaseth thee.
And he wrote letters the second time to them, saying: If you be
mine, and will obey me, take the heads of the sons of your master, and
come to me to Jezrahel by tomorrow at this time. Now the king's sons,
being seventy men, were brought up with the chief men of the city.
And when the letters came to them, they took the king's sons, and
slew seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent them to
him to Jezrahel.
And a messenger came, and told him, saying: They have brought the
heads of the king's sons. And he said: Lay ye them in two heaps by the
entering in of the gate until the morning.
And when it was light, he went out, and standing, said to all the
people: You are just: if I conspired against my master, and slew him;
who hath slain all these?
See therefore now that there hath not fallen to the ground any of
the words of the Lord, which the Lord spoke concerning the house of
servant Elias.
So Jehu slew all that were left of the house of Achab in
there were no remains left of him.
And he arose, and went to Samaria: and when he was come to the
shepherds' cabin in the way,
He met with the brethren of Ochozias, king of Juda, and he said
to them: Who are you? And they answered: We are the brethren of
of the queen.
And he said: Take them alive. And they took them alive, and
killed them at the pit by the cabin, two and forty men, and he left not
any of them.
And when he was departed thence, he found Jonadab, the son of
thy heart right as my heart is with thy heart? And Jonadab said: It is.
him up to him into the chariot,
And said to him: Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord. So
he made him ride in his chariot,
And brought him into Samaria. And he slew all that were left of
spoke by Elias.
And Jehu gathered together all the people, and said to them:
be done, that good may come of it. Rom. 3.8.
Now therefore call to me all the prophets of Baal, and all his
servants, and all his priests: let none be wanting, for I have a great
sacrifice to offer to Baal: whosoever shall be wanting, shall not live.
And he said: Proclaim a festival for Baal. And he called,
And he sent into all the borders of Israel; and all the servants
of Baal came: there was not one left that did not come. And they went
into the temple of Baal: and the house of Baal was filled, from one end
to the other.
And he said to them that were over the wardrobe: Bring forth
garments for all the servants of Baal.  And they brought them forth
garments.
And Jehu, and Jonadab, the son of Rechab, went to the temple of
not any with you of the servants of the Lord, but that there be the
servants of Baal only.
And they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings: but
the men escape, whom I have brought into your hands, he that letteth him
go, shall answer life for life.
And it came to pass, when the burnt offering was ended, that Jehu
commanded his soldiers and captains, saying: Go in, and kill them: let
none escape. And the soldiers and captains slew them with the edge of
the sword, and cast them out: and they went into the city of the temple
of Baal,
And brought the statue out of Baal's temple, and burnt it,
And broke it in pieces. They destroyed also the temple of Baal,
and made a jakes in its place unto this day.
So Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel:
But yet he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, the son of
were in Bethel, and Dan.
And the Lord said to Jehu: because thou hast diligently executed
that which was right and pleasing in my eyes, and hast done to the house
of Achab according to all that was in my heart: thy children shall sit
upon the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.
But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord, the God of
In those days the Lord began to be weary of Israel: and Hazael
ravaged them in all the coasts of Israel,
From the Jordan eastward, all the land of Galaad, and Gad, and
But the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and his
strength, are they not written in the book of the words of the days of
the kings of Israel?
And Jehu slept with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria:
and Joachaz, his son, reigned in his stead.
And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel, in Samaria, was eight
and twenty years.
Now Athalia, the mother of Ochozias, seeing that her son was dead,
arose and slew all the royal seed.
But Josaba the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ochozias, took
were slain, out of the bedchamber with his nurse: and hid him from the
face of Athalia; so that he was not slain.
And he was with her six years, hid in the house of the Lord. And
And in the seventh year Joiada sent, and taking the centurions and
soldiers, brought them in to him into the temple of the Lord, and made a
covenant with them: and taking an oath of them in the house of the Lord,
shewed them the king's son:
And he commanded them, saying: This is the thing that you must do.
Let a third part of you go in on the sabbath, and keep the watch
of the king's house. And let a third part be at the gate of Sur; and let
a third part be at the gate behind the dwelling of the shieldbearers;
and you shall keep the watch of the house of Messa.
But let two parts of you all that go forth on the sabbath, keep
the watch of the house of the Lord about the king.
And you shall compass him round about, having weapons in your
hands: and if any man shall enter the precinct of the temple, let him be
slain: and you shall be with the king, coming in and going out.
And the centurions did according to all things that Joiada the
priest, had commanded them: and taking every one their men, that went in
on the sabbath, with them that went out in the sabbath, came to Joiada,
the priest.
And he gave them the spears, and the arms of king David, which
were in the house of the Lord.
And they stood, having every one their weapons in their hands,
from the right side of the temple, unto the left side of the altar, and
of the temple, about the king.
And he brought forth the king's son, and put the diadem upon him,
and the testimony: and they made him king, and anointed him: and
clapping their hands, they said: God save the king.
And Athalia heard the noise of the people running: and going in
to the people into the temple of the Lord,
She saw the king standing upon a tribunal, as the manner was, and
the singers, and the trumpets near him, and all the people of the land
rejoicing, and sounding the trumpets: and she rent her garments, and
cried: A conspiracy, a conspiracy.
But Joiada commanded the centurions that were over the army, and
said to them: Have her forth without the precinct of the temple, and
whosoever shall follow her, let him be slain with the sword. For the
priest had said: Let her not be slain in the temple of the Lord.
And they laid hands on her: and thrust her out by the way by
which the horses go in, by the palace, and she was slain there.
And Joiada made a covenant between the Lord, and the king, and
the people, that they should be the people of the Lord; and between the
king and the people.
And all the people of the land went into the temple of Baal, and
broke down his altars, and his images they broke in pieces thoroughly:
they slew also Mathan the priest of Baal before the altar. And the
priest set guards in the house of the Lord.
And he took the centurions, and the bands of the Cerethi, and the
the house of the Lord: and they came by the way of the gate of the
shieldbearers into the palace, and he sat on the throne of the kings.
And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet:
but Athalia was slain with the sword in the king's house.
Now Joas was seven years old when he began to reign.
In the seventh year of Jehu, Joas began to reign: and he reigned
forty years in Jerusalem. The name of his mother was Sebia, of Bersabee.
And Joas did that which was right before the Lord all the days
that Joiada, the priest, taught him.
But yet he took not away the high places: for the people still
sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
And Joas said to the priests: all the money of the sanctified
things, which is brought into the temple of the Lord by those that pass,
which is offered for the price of a soul, and which of their own accord,
and of their own free heart, they bring into the temple of the Lord:
soul... That is, the ordinary oblation, which every soul was to offer by
the law. Ex. 30.
Let the priests take it according to their order and repair the
house, wheresoever they shall see any thing that wanteth repairing.
Now till the three and twentieth year of king Joas the priests did
not make the repairs of the temple.
And king Joas called Joiada, the high priest, and the priests,
saying to them: Why do you not repair the temple? Take you, therefore,
money no more according to your order, but restore it for the repairing
of the temple.
And the priests were forbidden to take any more money of the
people, and to make the repairs of the house.
And Joiada, the high priest, took a chest, and bored a hole in the
top, and set it by the altar at the right hand of them that came into
the house of the Lord; and the priests that kept the doors, put therein
all the money that was brought to the temple of the Lord.
And when they saw that there was very much money in the chest,
the king's scribe, and the high priest, came up, and poured it out, and
counted the money that was found in the house of the Lord.
And they gave it out by number and measure into the hands of them
that were over the builders of the house of the Lord: and they laid it
out to the carpenters, and the masons, that wrought in the house of the
And made the repairs: and to them that cut stones, and to buy
timber, and stones to be hewed, that the repairs of the house of the
expenses to uphold the house.
But there were not made of the same money for the temple of the
gold and silver, of the money that was brought into the temple of the
For it was given to them that did the work, that the temple of
the Lord might be repaired.
And they reckoned not with the men that received the money to
distribute it to the workmen, but they bestowed it faithfully.
But the money for trespass, and the money for sins, they brought
not into the temple of the Lord, because it was for the priests.
Then Hazael, king of Syria, went up, and fought against Geth, and
took it, and set his face to go up to Jerusalem.
Wherefore Joas, king of Juda, took all the sanctified things,
which Josaphat, and Joram, and Ochozias, his fathers, the kings of Juda,
had dedicated to holy uses, and which he himself had offered: and all
the silver that could be found in the treasures of the temple of the
and he went off from Jerusalem.
And the rest of the acts of Joas, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
And his servants arose, and conspired among themselves, and slew
For Josachar the son of Semaath, and Jozabad the son of Somer his
servant, struck him, and he died: and they buried him with his fathers
in the city of David; and Amasias, his son, reigned in his stead.
but not in the sepulchres of the kings. 2 Par. 14.
death of Eliseus the prophet: a dead man is raised to life by the touch
of his bones.
In the three and twentieth year of Joas son of Ochozias, king of
seventeen years.
And he did evil before the Lord, and followed the sins of
from them.
And the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hand of Hazael, the king of Syria, and into the
hand of Benadad, the son of Hazael, all days.
But Joachaz besought the face of the Lord, and the Lord heard him:
for he saw the distress of Israel, because the king of Syria had
oppressed them:
And the Lord gave Israel a saviour, and they were delivered out of
the hand of the king of Syria: and the children of Israel dwelt in their
pavilions as yesterday and the day before.
But yet they departed not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam,
who made Israel to sin, but walked in them: and there still remained a
grove also in Samaria.
And Joachaz had no more left of the people than fifty horsemen,
and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen: for the king of Syria had
slain them, and had brought them low as dust by threshing in the
barnfloor.
But the rest of the acts of Joachaz, and all that he did, and his
valour, are they not written in the book of the words of the days of the
kings of Israel?
And Joachaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in
In the seven and thirtieth year of Joas, king of Juda, Joas the
son of Joachaz reigned over Israel, in Samaria, sixteen years.
And he did that which is evil in the sight of the Lord: he
departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who made
But the rest of the acts of Joas, and all that he did, and his
valour wherewith he fought against Amasias, king of Juda, are they not
written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
And Joas slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his
throne. But Joas was buried in Samaria, with the kings of Israel.
Now Eliseus was sick of the illness whereof he died: and Joas,
king of Israel, went down to him, and wept before him, and said: O my
father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the guider thereof.
And Eliseus said to him: Bring a bow and arrows. And when he had
brought him a bow and arrows,
He said to the king of Israel: Put thy hand upon the bow. And
when he had put his hand, Eliseus put his hands over the king's hands,
And said: Open the window to the east. And when he had opened it,
of the Lord's deliverance, and the arrow of the deliverance from Syria:
and thou shalt strike the Syrians in Aphec, till thou consume them.
And he said: Take the arrows. And when he had taken them, he said
to him: Strike with an arrow upon the ground. And he struck three times,
and stood still.
And the man of God was angry with him, and said: If thou hadst
smitten five or six or seven times, thou hadst smitten Syria even to
utter destruction: but now three times shalt thou smite it.
to the prophet that the king should overcome the Syrians as many times
as he should then strike on the ground; but as he had not at the same
time revealed to him how often the king would strike, the prophet was
concerned to see that he struck but thrice.
And Eliseus died, and they buried him. And the rovers from Moab
came into the land the same year.
And some that were burying a man, saw the rovers, and cast the
body into the sepulchre of Eliseus.  And when it had touched the bones
of Eliseus, the man came to life and stood upon his feet.
Now Hazael, king of Syria, afflicted Israel all the days of
And the Lord had mercy on them, and returned to them, because of
his covenant, which he had made with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob: and
he would not destroy them, nor utterly cast them away, unto this present
time.
And Hazael, king of Syria, died; and Benadad, his son, reigned in
his stead.
Now Joas the son of Joachaz, took the cities out of the hand of
restored the cities to Israel.
In the second year of Joas son of Joachaz, king of Israel, reigned
He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign; and nine
and twenty years he reigned in Jerusalem; the name of his mother was
And he did that which was right before the Lord, but yet not like
did:
But this only, that he took not away the high places; for yet the
people sacrificed, and burnt incense in the high places:
And when he had possession of the kingdom, he put his servants to
death that had slain the king, his father.
But the children of the murderers he did not put to death,
according to that which is written in the book of the law of Moses,
wherein the Lord commanded, saying: The fathers shall not be put to
death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for
the fathers: but every man shall die for his own sin.
He slew of Edom in the valley of the Saltpits, ten thousand men,
and took the rock by war, and called the name thereof Jectehel, unto
this day.
Then Amasias sent messengers to Joas, son of Joachaz, son of Jehu,
king of Israel, saying: Come, let us see one another.
And Joas, king of Israel, sent again to Amasias, king of Juda,
saying: A thistle of Libanus sent to a cedar tree, which is in Libanus,
saying: Give thy daughter to my son to wife. And the beasts of the
forest, that are in Libanus, passed, and trod down the thistle.
Thou hast beaten and prevailed over Edom, and thy heart hath
lifted thee up; be content with this glory, and sit at home; why
provokest thou evil, that thou shouldst fall, and Juda with thee?
But Amasias did not rest satisfied. So Joas, king of Israel, went
up; and he and Amasias, king of Juda, saw one another in Bethsames, a
town in Juda.
And Juda was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every
man to their dwellings.
But Joas, king of Israel, took Amasias, king of Juda, the son of
and he broke down the wall of Jerusalem, from the gate of Ephraim to the
gate of the corner, four hundred cubits.
And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that
were found in the house of the Lord, and in the king's treasures, and
hostages, and returned to Samaria.
But the rest of the acts of Joas, which he did, and his valour,
wherewith he fought against Amasias, king of Juda, are they not written
in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
And Joas slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, with
the kings of Israel: and Jeroboam, his son, reigned in his stead.
And Amasias, the son of Joas, king of Juda, lived after the death
of Joas, son of Joachaz, king of Israel, fifteen years.
And the rest of the acts of Amasias, are they not written in the
book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
Now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem: and he fled
to Lachis. And they sent after him to Lachis, and killed him there.
And they brought him away upon horses, and he was buried in
And all the people of Juda took Azarias, who was sixteen years
old, and made him king instead of his father, Amasias.
He built Elath, and restored it to Juda, after that the king
slept with his fathers.
In the fifteenth year of Amasias, son of Joas, king of Juda,
reigned Jeroboam, the son of Joas, king of Israel, in Samaria, one and
forty years:
And he did that which is evil before the Lord.  He departed not
from all the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who made Israel to sin.
He restored the borders of Israel from the entrance of Emath,
unto the sea of the wilderness, according to the word of the Lord, the
the prophet, who was of Geth, which is in Opher.
For the Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was
exceedingly bitter, and that they were consumed even to them that were
shut up in prison, and the lowest persons, and that there was no one to
help Israel.
And the Lord did not say that he would blot out the name of
son of Joas.
But the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and
his valour, wherewith he fought, and how he restored Damascus and Emath
to Juda, in Israel, are they not written in the book of the words of the
days of the kings of Israel?
And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, the kings of Israel; and
In the seven and twentieth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel,
reigned Azarias, son of Amasias, king of Juda.
He was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
two and fifty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Jechelia,
of Jerusalem.
And he did that which was pleasing before the Lord, according to
all that his father, Amasias, had done.
But the high places he did not destroy, for the people sacrificed,
and burnt incense in the high places.
And the Lord struck the king, so that he was a leper unto the day
of his death, and he dwelt in a free house apart: but Joatham, the
king's son, governed the palace, and judged the people of the land.
26.
And the rest of the acts of Azarias, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
And Azarias slept with his fathers: and they buried him with his
ancestors in the city of David, and Joatham, his son, reigned in his
stead.
In the eight and thirtieth year of Azarias, king of Juda, reigned
And he did that which is evil before the Lord, as his fathers had
done: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nabat, who
made Israel to sin.
And Sellum, the son of Jabes, conspired against him: and struck
him publicly, and killed him, and reigned in his place.
Now the rest of the acts of Zacharias, are they not written in
the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
This was the word of the Lord, which he spoke to Jehu, saying:
Sellum, the son of Jabes, began to reign in the nine and
thirtieth year of Azarias, king of Juda: and reigned one month in
And Manahem, the son of Gadi, went up from Thersa, and he came
into Samaria, and struck Sellum, the son of Jabes, in Samaria, and slew
him, and reigned in his stead.
And the rest of the acts of Sellum, and his conspiracy which he
made, are they not written in the book of the words of the days of the
kings of Israel?
Then Manahem destroyed Thapsa and all that were in it, and the
borders thereof from Thersa, because they would not open to him: and he
slew all the women thereof that were with child, and ripped them up.
In the nine and thirtieth year of Azarias, king of Juda, reigned
And he did that which was evil before the Lord: he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who made Israel to sin, all
his days.
And Phul, king of the Assyrians, came into the land, and Manahem
gave Phul a thousand talents of silver to aid him and to establish him
in the kingdom.
And Manahem laid a tax upon Israel, on all that were mighty and
rich, to give the king of the Assyrians, each man fifty sicles of
silver: so the king of the Assyrians turned back, and did not stay in
the land.
And the rest of the acts of Manahem, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
And Manahem slept with his fathers: and Phaceia, his son, reigned
in his stead.
In the fiftieth year of Azarias, king of Juda, reigned Phaceia,
the son of Manahem, over Israel, in Samaria, two years.
And he did that which was evil before the Lord: he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who made Israel to sin.
And Phacee the son of Romelia, his captain, conspired against
him, and smote him in Samaria, in the tower of the king's house, near
And the rest of the acts of Phaceia, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
In the two and fiftieth year of Azarias, king of Juda, reigned
And he did that which was evil before the Lord: he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who made Israel to sin.
In the days of Phacee, king of Israel, came Theglathphalasar,
king of Assyria, and took Aion, and Abel Domum Maacha, and Janoe, and
and carried them captives into Assyria.
Now Osee, son of Ela, conspired, and formed a plot against
his stead in the twentieth year of Joatham, the son of Ozias.
the beginning of Joatham's reign. The sacred writer chooses rather to
follow here this date than to speak of the years of Achaz, who had not
yet been mentioned.
But the rest of the acts of Phacee, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Israel?
In the second year of Phacee, the son of Romelia king of Israel,
reigned Joatham, son of Ozias, king of Juda.
He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Jerusa,
the daughter of Sadoc.
And he did that which was right before the Lord: according to all
that his father Ozias had done, so did he.
But the high places he took not away: the people still
sacrificed, and burnt incense in the high places: he built the highest
gate of the house of the Lord.
But the rest of the acts of Joatham, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
In those days the Lord began to send into Juda, Rasin king of
And Joatham slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in
the city of David, his father; and Achaz, his son, reigned in his stead.
him: he hireth the king of the Assyrians to assist him: he causeth an
altar to be made after the pattern of that of Damascus.
In the seventeenth year of Phacee, the son of Romelia reigned
Achaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem: he did not that which was pleasing in the
sight of the Lord, his God, as David, his father.
But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel: moreover, he
consecrated also his son, making him pass through the fire, according to
the idols of the nations which the Lord destroyed before the children of
He sacrificed also, and burnt incense in the high places, and on
the hills, and under every green tree.
Then Rasin, king of Syria, and Phacee, son of Romelia, king of
not able to overcome him.
At that time Rasin, king of Syria, restored Aila to Syria, and
drove the men of Juda out of Aila: and the Edomites came into Aila, and
dwelt there unto this day.
And Achaz sent messengers to Theglathphalasar, king of the
out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of
And when he had gathered together the silver and gold that could
be found in the house of the Lord, and in the king's treasures, he sent
it for a present to the king of the Assyrians.
And he agreed to his desire: for the king of the Assyrians went up
against Damascus, and laid it waste: and he carried away the inhabitants
thereof to Cyrene; but Rasin he slew.
And king Achaz went to Damascus to meet Theglathphalasar, king of
the Assyrians, and when he had seen the altar of Damascus, king Achaz
sent to Urias, the priest, a pattern of it, and its likeness, according
to all the work thereof.
And Urias, the priest, built an altar according to all that king
And when the king was come from Damascus, he saw the altar and
worshipped it: and went up and offered holocausts, and his own
sacrifice;
And he offered libations, and poured the blood of the peace
offerings, which he had offered, upon the altar.
But the altar of brass that was before the Lord, he removed from
the face of the temple, and from the place of the altar, and from the
place of the temple of the Lord: and he set it at the side of the altar
towards the north.
And king Achaz commanded Urias, the priest, saying: Upon the
great altar offer the morning holocaust, and the evening sacrifice, and
the king's holocaust, and his sacrifice, and the holocaust of the whole
people of the land, and their sacrifices, and their libations: and all
the blood of the holocaust, and all the blood of the victim, thou shalt
pour out upon it: but the altar of brass shall be ready at my pleasure.
So Urias, the priest, did according to all that king Achaz had
commanded him.
And king Achaz took away the graven bases, and the laver that was
upon them: and he took down the sea from the brazen oxen that held it
up, and put it upon a pavement of stone.
The Musach also for the sabbath, which he had built in the
temple, and the king's entry from without, he turned into the temple of
the Lord, because of the king of the Assyrians.
Now the rest of the acts of Achaz which he did, are they not
written in the book of the words of the of the days of the kings of
And Achaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in the
city of David, and Ezechias, his son, reigned in his stead.
captivity: other inhabitants are sent to Samaria, who make a mixture of
religion.
In the twelfth year of Achaz king of Juda, Osee the son of Ela
reigned in Samaria, over Israel, nine years.
but was not in quiet possession of the kingdom to the twelfth year of
And he did evil before the Lord: but not as the kings of Israel
that had been before him.
Against him came up Salmanasar, king of the Assyrians; and Osee
became his servant, and paid him tribute.
And when the king of the Assyrians found that Osee, endeavouring
to rebel, had sent messengers to Sua, the king of Egypt, that he might
not pay tribute to the king of the Assyrians, as he had done every year,
he besieged him, bound him, and cast him into prison.
And he went through all the land: and going up to Samaria, he
besieged it three years.
And in the ninth year of Osee, the king of the Assyrians took
and Habor, by the river of Gozan, in the cities of the Medes.
For so it was that the children of Israel had sinned against the
the hand of Pharao, king of Egypt; and they worshipped strange gods.
And they walked according to the way of the nations which the Lord
had destroyed in the sight of the children of Israel, and of the kings
of Israel: because they had done in like manner.
And the children of Israel offended the Lord, their God, with
things that were not right: and built them high places in all their
cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.
And they made them statues and groves on every high hill, and
under every shady tree:
And they burnt incense there upon altars, after the manner of the
nations which the Lord had removed from their face: and they did wicked
things, provoking the Lord.
And they worshipped abominations, concerning which the Lord had
commanded them that they should not do this thing.
And the Lord testified to them in Israel, and in Juda, by the
hand of all the prophets and seers, saying: Return from your wicked
ways, and keep my precepts, and ceremonies, according to all the law
which I commanded your fathers: and as I have sent to you in the hand of
my servants the prophets.
And they hearkened not, but hardened their necks like to the neck
of their fathers, who would not obey the Lord, their God.
And they rejected his ordinances, and the covenant that he made
with their fathers, and the testimonies which he testified against them:
and they followed vanities, and acted vainly: and they followed the
nations that were round about them, concerning which the Lord had
commanded them that they should not do as they did.
And they forsook all the precepts of the Lord, their God: and
made to themselves two molten calves, and groves, and adored all the
host of heaven: and they served Baal,
And consecrated their sons, and their daughters, through fire:
and they gave themselves to divinations, and soothsayings: and they
delivered themselves up to do evil before the Lord, to provoke him.
And the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them from
his sight, and there remained only the tribe of Juda.
But neither did Juda itself keep the commandments of the Lord,
their God: but they walked in the errors of Israel, which they had
wrought.
And the Lord cast off all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them,
and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, till he cast them away
from his face:
Even from that time, when Israel was rent from the house of
separated Israel from the Lord, and made them commit a great sin.
And the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam,
which he had done: and they departed not from them,
Till the Lord removed Israel from his face, as he had spoken in
the hand of all his servants, the prophets: and Israel was carried away
out of their land to Assyria, unto this day.
And the king of the Assyrians brought people from Babylon, and
from Cutha, and from Avah, and from Emath, and from Sepharvaim: and
placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel:
and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.
And when they began to dwell there, they feared not the Lord: and
the Lord sent lions among them, which killed them.
And it was told the king of the Assyrians, and it was said: The
nations which thou hast removed, and made to dwell in the cities of
hath sent lions among them: and behold they kill them, because they know
not the manner of the God of the land.
And the king of the Assyrians commanded, saying: Carry thither
one of the priests whom you brought from thence captive, and let him go,
and dwell with them: and let him teach them the ordinances of the God of
the land.
So one of the priests, who had been carried away captive from
worship the Lord.
And every nation made gods of their own and put them in the
temples of the high places, which the Samaritans had made, every nation
in their cities where they dwelt.
For the men of Babylon made Sochothbenoth: and the Cuthites made
And the Hevites made Nebahaz, and Tharthac.  And they that were
of Sepharvaim burnt their children in fire, to Adramelech and Anamelech,
the gods of Sepharvaim.
And nevertheless they worshipped the Lord. And they made to
themselves, of the lowest of the people, priests of the high places, and
they placed them in the temples of the high places.
And when they worshipped the Lord, they served also their own
gods, according to the custom of the nations out of which they were
brought to Samaria:
Unto this day they follow the old manner: they fear not the Lord,
neither do they keep his ceremonies, and judgments, and law, and the
commandment, which the Lord commanded the children of Jacob, whom he
surnamed Israel:
With whom he made a covenant, and charged them, saying: You shall
not fear strange gods, nor shall you adore them, nor worship them, nor
sacrifice to them.
But the Lord, your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt,
with great power, and a stretched out arm, him shall you fear, and him
shall you adore, and to him shall you sacrifice.
And the ceremonies, and judgments, and law, and the commandment,
which he wrote for you, you shall observe to do them always: and you
shall not fear strange gods.
And the covenant that he made with you, you shall not forget:
neither shall ye worship strange Gods,
But fear the Lord, your God, and he shall deliver you out of the
hand of all your enemies.
But they did not hearken to them, but did according to their old
custom.
So these nations feared the Lord, but nevertheless served also
their idols: their children also, and grandchildren, as their fathers
did, so do they unto this day.
revolt; and blasphemeth the Lord.
In the third year of Osee, the son of Ela, king of Israel, reigned
He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign: and he
reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was
And he did that which was good before the Lord, according to all
that David, his father, had done.
He destroyed the high places, and broke the statues in pieces, and
cut down the groves, and broke the brazen serpent, which Moses had made:
for till that time the children of Israel burnt incense to it: and he
called its name Nohestan.
brass. So he called it in contempt, because they had made an idol of it.
He trusted in the Lord, the God of Israel: so that after him there
was none like him among all the kings of Juda, nor any of them that were
before him:
And he stuck to the Lord, and departed not from his steps, but
kept his commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses.
Wherefore the Lord also was with him, and in all things, to which
he went forth, he behaved himself wisely. And he rebelled against the
king of the Assyrians, and served him not.
He smote the Philistines as far as Gaza, and all their borders,
from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.
In the fourth year of king Ezechias, which was the seventh year of
came up to Samaria, and besieged it,
And took it. For after three years, in the sixth year of
was taken:
And the king of the Assyrians carried away Israel into Assyria,
and placed them in Hala, and in Habor, by the rivers of Gozan, in the
cities of the Medes.
Because they hearkened not to the voice of the Lord, their God,
but transgressed his covenant: all that Moses, the servant of the Lord,
commanded, they would not hear, nor do.
In the fourteenth year of king Ezechias, Sennacherib, king of the
Then Ezechias, king of Juda, sent messengers to the king of the
that thou shalt put upon me, I will bear. And the king of the Assyrians
put a tax upon Ezechias, king of Juda, of three hundred talents of
silver, and thirty talents of gold.
And Ezechias gave all the silver that was found in the house of
the Lord, and in the king's treasures.
At that time Ezechias broke the doors of the temple of the Lord,
and the plates of gold which he had fastened on them, and gave them to
the king of the Assyrians.
And the king of the Assyrians sent Tharthan, and Rabsaris, and
conduit of the upper pool, which is in the way of the fuller's field.
And they called for the king: and there went out to them Eliacim,
the son of Helcias, who was over the house, and Sobna, the scribe, and
And Rabsaces said to them: Speak to Ezechias: Thus saith the
great king, the king of the Assyrians: What is this confidence, wherein
thou trustest?
Perhaps thou hast taken counsel, to prepare thyself for battle.
Dost thou trust in Egypt a staff of a broken reed, upon which if
a man lean, it will break and go into his hand, and pierce it? so is
But if you say to me: We trust in the Lord, our God: is it not
he, whose high places and altars Ezechias hath taken away: and hath
commanded Juda and Jerusalem: You shall worship before this altar in
Now therefore come over to my master, the king of the Assyrians,
and I will give you two thousand horses, and see whether you be able to
have riders for them.
And how can you stand against one lord of the least of my
master's servants? Dost thou trust in Egypt for chariots and for
horsemen?
Is it without the will of the Lord that I am come up to this
place to destroy it? The Lord said to me: Go up to this land, and
destroy it.
Then Eliacim, the son of Helcias, and Sobna, and Joahe, said to
understand that tongue: and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in
the hearing of the people that are upon the wall.
And Rabsaces answered them, saying: Hath my master sent me to thy
master, and to thee, to speak these words, and not rather to the men
that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink
their urine with you?
Then Rabsaces stood, and cried out with a loud voice in the Jews'
language, and said: Hear the word of the great king, the king of the
Thus saith the king: Let not Ezechias deceive you: for he shall
not be able to deliver you out of my hand.
Neither let him make you trust in the Lord, saying: The Lord will
surely deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the hand of the
king of the Assyrians.
Do not hearken to Ezechias. For thus saith the king of the
me: and every man of you shall eat of his own vineyard, and of his own
fig tree: and you shall drink water of your own cisterns,
Till I come, and take you away, to a land, like to your own land,
a fruitful land, and plentiful in wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a
land of olives, and oil, and honey, and you shall live, and not die.
deliver us.
Have any of the gods of the nations delivered their land from the
hand of the king of Assyria?
Where is the god of Emath, and of Arphad?  where is the god of
hand?
Who are they among all the gods of the nations that have
delivered their country out of my hand, that the Lord may deliver
But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word: for
they had received commandment from the king that they should not answer
him.
And Eliacim, the son of Helcias, who was over the house, and
promiseth to protect Jerusalem. An angel destroyeth the army of the
And when king Ezechias heard these words, he rent his garments,
and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord.
And he sent Eliacim, who was over the house, and Sobna, the
scribe, and the ancients of the priests, covered with sackcloths, to
And they said to him: Thus saith Ezechias: This day is a day of
tribulation, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: the children are come to
the birth, and the woman in travail hath not strength.
It may be the Lord, thy God, will hear all the words of Rabsaces,
whom the king of the Assyrians, his master, hath sent to reproach the
living God, and to reprove with words, which the Lord, thy God, hath
heard: and do thou offer prayer for the remnants that are found.
So the servants of king Ezechias came to Isaias.
And Isaias said to them: Thus shall you say to your master: Thus
saith the Lord: Be not afraid for the words which thou hast heard, with
which the servants of the king of the Assyrians have blasphemed me.
Behold I will send a spirit upon him, and he shall hear a message,
and shall return into his own country, and I will make him fall by the
sword in his own country.
And Rabsaces returned, and found the king of the Assyrians
besieging Lobna: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachis.
And when he heard of Tharaca, king of Ethiopia: Behold, he is come
out to fight with thee: and was going against him, he sent messengers to
Thus shall you say to Ezechias, king of Juda: Let not thy God
deceive thee, in whom thou trustest: and do not say: Jerusalem shall not
be delivered into the hands of the king of the Assyrians.
Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of the Assyrians have done
to all countries, how they have laid them waste: and canst thou alone be
delivered?
Have the gods of the nations delivered any of them, whom my
fathers have destroyed, to wit, Gozan, and Haran, and Reseph, and the
children of Eden, that were in Thelassar?
Where is the king of Emath, and the king of Arphad, and the king
of the city of Sepharvaim, and of Ana, and of Ava?
And when Ezechias had received the letter of the hand of the
messengers, and had read it, he went up to the house of the Lord, and
spread it before the Lord,
And he prayed in his sight, saying: O Lord God of Israel, who
sittest upon the cherubims, thou alone art the God of all the kings of
the earth: thou madest heaven and earth:
Incline thy ear, and hear: open, O Lord, thy eyes and see: and
hear all the words of Sennacherib, who hath sent to upbraid unto us the
living God.
Of a truth, O Lord, the kings of the Assyrians have destroyed
nations, and the lands of them all.
And they have cast their gods into the fire: for they were not
gods, but the work of men's hands, of wood and stone, and they destroyed
them.
Now therefore, O Lord our God, save us from his hand, that all
the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, the only God.
And Isaias, the son of Amos, sent to Ezechias, saying: Thus saith
the Lord, the God of Israel: I have heard the prayer thou hast made to
me concerning Sennacherib, king of the Assyrians.
This is the word that the Lord hath spoken of him: The virgin,
the daughter of Sion, hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn: the
daughter of Jerusalem hath wagged her head behind thy back.
Whom hast thou reproached, and whom hast thou blasphemed? against
whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thy eyes on high?
against the holy one of Israel.
By the hand of thy servants thou hast reproached the Lord, and
hast said: With the multitude of my chariots I have gone up to the
height of the mountains, to the top of Libanus, and have cut down its
tall cedars, and its choice fir trees. And I have entered into the
furthest parts thereof, and the forest of its Carmel.
figurative, signifying under the names of mountains and forests, the
kings and provinces whom the Assyrians had triumphed over.
I have cut down, and I have drunk strange waters, and have dried
up with the soles of my feet all the shut up waters.
Hast thou not heard what I have done from the beginning? from the
days of old I have formed it, and now I have brought it to effect: that
fenced cities of fighting men should be turned to heaps of ruins:
are no more than what I have decreed; and are not to be ascribed to thy
wisdom or strength, but to my will and ordinance: who have given to thee
to take and destroy so many fenced cities, and to carry terror wherever
thou comest.-Ibid. Heaps of ruin... Literally ruin of the hills.
And the inhabitants of them were weak of hand, they trembled and
were confounded, they became like the grass of the field, and the green
herb on the tops of houses, which withered before it came to maturity.
Thy dwelling, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy way I
knew before, and thy rage against me.
Thou hast been mad against me, and thy pride hath come up to my
ears: therefore I will put a ring in thy nose, and a bit between thy
lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.
And to thee, O Ezechias, this shall be a sign: Eat this year what
thou shalt find: and in the second year, such things as spring of
themselves: but in the third year sow and reap: plant vineyards, and eat
the fruit of them.
And whatsoever shall be left of the house of Juda, shall take
root downward, and bear fruit upward.
For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and that which
shall be saved out of mount Sion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do
this.
Wherefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of the
nor come before it with shield, nor cast a trench about it.
By the way that he came he shall return: and into this city he
shall not come, saith the Lord.
And I will protect this city, and will save it for my own sake,
and for David, my servant's sake.
And it came to pass that night, that an angel of the Lord came,
and slew in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five
thousand. And when he arose early in the morning, he saw all the bodies
of the dead.
And Sennacherib, king of the Assyrians, departing, went away, and
he returned and abode in Ninive.
And as he was worshipping in the temple of Nesroch, his god,
into the land of the Armenians, and Asarhaddon, his son, reigned in his
stead.
sign by the sun's returning back. He sheweth all his treasures to the
ambassadors of the king of Babylon: Isaias reproving him for it,
foretelleth the Babylonish captivity.
In those days Ezechias was sick unto death: and Isaias, the son of
charge concerning thy house, for thou shalt die, and not live.
And he turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord,
saying:
I beseech thee, O Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is pleasing
before thee. And Ezechias wept with much weeping.
And before Isaias was gone out of the middle of the court, the
word of the Lord came to him, saying:
Go back, and tell Ezechias, the captain of my people: Thus saith
the Lord, the God of David, thy father: I have heard thy prayer, and I
have seen thy tears: and behold I have healed thee: on the third day
thou shalt go up to the temple of the Lord.
And I will add to thy days fifteen years: and I will deliver thee
and this city out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians, and I will
protect this city for my own sake, and for David, my servant's sake.
And Isaias said: Bring me a lump of figs. And when they had
brought it, and laid it upon his boil, he was healed.
And Ezechias had said to Isaias: What shall be the sign that the
third day?
And Isaias said to him: This shall be the sign from the Lord, that
the Lord will do the word which he hath spoken: Wilt thou that the
shadow go forward ten lines, or that it go back so many degrees?
And Ezechias said: It is an easy matter for the shadow to go
forward ten lines: and I do not desire that this be done, but let it
return back ten degrees.
And Isaias, the prophet, called upon the Lord, and he brought the
shadow ten degrees backwards by the lines, by which it had already gone
down on the dial of Achaz.
At that time Berodach Baladan, the son of Baladan, king of the
that Ezechias had been sick.
And Ezechias rejoiced at their coming, and he shewed them the
house of his aromatical spices, and the gold, and the silver, and divers
precious odours, and ointments, and the house of his vessels, and all
that he had in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all
his dominions, that Ezechias shewed them not.
And Isaias, the prophet, came to king Ezechias, and said to him:
to him: From a far country, they came to me out of Babylon.
And he said: What did they see in thy house? Ezechias said: They
saw all the things that are in my house: There is nothing among my
treasures that I have not shewed them.
And Isaias said to Ezechias: Hear the word of the Lord.
Behold the days shall come, that all that is in thy house, and
that thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried
into Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the Lord.
And of thy sons also that shall issue from thee, whom thou shalt
beget, they shall take away, and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of
the king of Babylon.
Ezechias said to Isaias: The word of the Lord, which thou hast
spoken, is good: let peace and truth be in my days.
And the rest of the acts of Ezechias, and all his might, and how
he made a pool, and a conduit, and brought waters into the city, are
they not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of
And Ezechias slept with his fathers, and Manasses, his son
reigned in his stead.
son Amon succeedeth him, and is slain by his servants.
Manasses was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned five and fifty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was
And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to the idols
of the nations, which the Lord destroyed from before the face of the
children of Israel.
And he turned, and built up the high places, which Ezechias, his
father, had destroyed: and he set up altars to Baal, and made groves, as
heaven, and served them.
And he built altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord
said: In Jerusalem I will put my name.
And he built altars for all the host of heaven, in the two courts
of the temple of the Lord.
And he made his son pass through fire: and he used divinations,
and observed omens, and appointed pythons, and multiplied soothsayers,
to do evil before the Lord, and to provoke him.
He set also an idol of the grove, which he had made, in the temple
of the Lord: concerning which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his
son: In this temple, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all
the tribes of Israel, I will put my name for ever.
And I will no more make the feet of Israel to be moved out of the
land, which I gave to their fathers: only if they will observe to do all
that I have commanded them, according to the law which my servant Moses
commanded them.
But they hearkened not: but were seduced by Manasses, to do evil
more than the nations which the Lord destroyed before the children of
And the Lord spoke in the hand of his servants, the prophets,
saying:
Because Manasses, king of Juda, hath done these most wicked
abominations, beyond all that the Amorrhites did before him, and hath
made Juda also to sin with his filthy doings:
Therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: Behold, I will
bring on evils upon Jerusalem and Juda: that whosoever shall hear of
them, both his ears shall tingle.
And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the
weight of the house of Achab: and I will efface Jerusalem, as writings
tables are wont to be effaced, and I will erase and turn it, and draw
the pencil often over the face thereof.
And I will leave the remnants of my inheritance, and will deliver
them into the hands of their enemies: and they shall become a prey, and
a spoil to all their enemies.
Because they have done evil before me, and have continued to
provoke me, from the day that their fathers came out of Egypt, even unto
this day.
Moreover, Manasses shed also very much innocent blood, till he
filled Jerusalem up to the mouth: besides his sins, wherewith he made
Now the rest of the acts of Manasses, and all that he did, and
his sin, which he sinned, are they not written in the book of the words
of the days of the kings of Juda?
And Manasses slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden
of his own house, in the garden of Oza: and Amon, his son, reigned in
his stead.
Two and twenty years old was Amon when he began to reign, and he
reigned two years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Messalemeth,
the daughter of Harus, of Jeteba.
And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, as Manasses, his
father, had done.
And he walked in all the way in which his father had walked: and
he served the abominations which his father had served, and he adored
them.
And forsook the Lord, the God of his fathers, and walked not in
the way of the Lord.
And his servants plotted against him, and slew the king in his
own house.
But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king Amon: and made Josias, his son, their king in his stead.
But the rest of the acts of Amon, which he did, are they not
written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
And they buried him in his sepulchre, in the garden of Oza: and
his son, Josias, reigned in his stead.
they consult the Lord, and are told that great evils shall fall upon
them, but not in the time of Josias.
Josias was eight years old when he began to reign: he reigned one
and thirty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Idida, the
daughter of Hadaia, of Besecath.
And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and
walked in all the ways of David, his father: he turned not aside to the
right hand, or to the left.
And in the eighteenth year of king Josias, the king sent Saphan,
the son of Assia, the son of Messulam, the scribe of the temple of the
Go to Helcias, the high priest, that the money may be put together
which is brought into the temple of the Lord, which the doorkeepers of
the temple have gathered of the people.
And let it be given to the workmen by the overseers of the house
of the Lord: and let them distribute it to those that work in the temple
of the Lord, to repair the temple:
That is, to carpenters and masons, and to such as mend breaches:
and that timber may be bought, and stones out of the quarries, to repair
the temple of the Lord.
But let there be no reckoning made with them of the money which
they receive, but let them have it in their power, and in their trust.
And Helcias, the high priest, said to Saphan, the scribe: I have
found the book of the law in the house of the Lord: and Helcias gave the
book to Saphan, and he read it.
And Saphan, the scribe, came to the king, and brought him word
again concerning that which he had commanded, and said: Thy servants
have gathered together the money that was found in the house of the
overseers of the works of the temple of the Lord.
And Saphan, the scribe, told the king, saying: Helcias, the
priest, hath delivered to me a book. And when Saphan had read it before
the king,
And the king had heard the words of the law of the Lord, he rent
his garments.
And he commanded Helcias, the priest, and Ahicam, the son of
Go and consult the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all
wrath of the Lord is kindled against us, because our fathers have not
hearkened to the words of this book, to do all that is written for us.
So Helcias, the priest, and Ahicam, and Achobor, and Sapham, and
And she said to them: Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel:
Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will bring evils upon this place,
and upon the inhabitants thereof, all the words of the law which the
king of Juda hath read:
Because they have forsaken me, and have sacrificed to strange
gods, provoking me by all the works of their hands: therefore my
indignation shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be
quenched.
But to the king of Juda, who sent you to consult the Lord, thus
shall you say: Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: for as much as
thou hast heard the words of the book,
And thy heart hath been moved to fear, and thou hast humbled
thyself before the Lord, hearing the words against this place, and the
inhabitants thereof, to wit, that they should become a wonder and a
curse: and thou hast rent thy garments, and wept before me; I also have
heard thee; saith the Lord.
Therefore I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
gathered to thy sepulchre in peace; that thy eyes may not see all the
evils which I will bring upon this place.
it. He abolisheth all idolatry, celebrateth the phase: is slain in
battle by the king of Egypt. The short reign of Joachaz, in whose place
And they brought the king word again what she had said. And he
sent: and all the ancients of Juda and Jerusalem were assembled to him.
And the king went up to the temple of the Lord, and all the men of
the prophets, and all the people, both little and great: and in the
hearing of them all he read all the words of the book of the covenant,
which was found in the house of the Lord.
And the king stood upon the step: and he made a covenant with the
testimonies, and his ceremonies, with all their heart, and with all
their soul, and to perform the words of this covenant, which were
written in that book: and the people agreed to the covenant.
more eminent place, from whence he might be seen and heard by the
people.
And the king commanded Helcias, the high priest, and the priests
of the second order, and the doorkeepers, to cast out of the temple of
the Lord all the vessels that had been made for Baal, and for the grove,
and for all the host of heaven: and he burnt them without Jerusalem, in
the valley of Cedron, and he carried the ashes of them to Bethel.
And he destroyed the soothsayers, whom the kings of Juda had
appointed to sacrifice in the high places in the cities of Juda, and
round about Jerusalem: them also that burnt incense to Baal, and to the
sun, and to the moon, and to the twelve signs, and to all the host of
heaven.
And he caused the grove to be carried out from the house of the
and reduced it to dust, and cast the dust upon the graves of the common
people.
He destroyed also the pavilions of the effeminate, which were in
the house of the Lord, for which the women wove as it were little
dwellings for the grove.
And he gathered together all the priests out of the cities of
sacrifice, from Gabaa to Bersabee: and he broke down the altars of the
gates that were in the entering in of the gate of Josue, governor of the
city, which was on the left hand of the gate of the city.
However, the priests of the high places came not up to the altar
of the Lord, in Jerusalem: but only eat of the unleavened bread among
their brethren.
And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of
through fire, to Moloch.
And he took away the horses which the kings of Juda had given to
the sun, at the entering in of the temple of the Lord, near the chamber
of Nathanmelech the eunuch, who was in Pharurim: and he burnt the
chariots of the sun with fire.
And the altars that were upon the top of the upper chamber of
had made in the two courts of the temple of the Lord, the king broke
down: and he ran from thence, and cast the ashes of them into the
torrent Cedron.
The high places also that were at Jerusalem, on the right side of
the Mount of Offence, which Solomon, king of Israel, had built to
and to Melchom, the abomination of the children of Ammon, the king
defiled.
And he broke in pieces the statues, and cut down the groves: and
he filled their places with the bones of dead men.
Moreover, the altar also that was at Bethel, and the high place,
which Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who made Israel to sin, had made: both
the altar, and the high place, he broke down and burnt, and reduced to
powder, and burnt the grove.
And as Josias turned himself, he saw there the sepulchres that
were in the mount: and he sent and took the bones out of the sepulchres,
and burnt them upon the altar, and defiled it according to the word of
the Lord, which the man of God spoke, who had foretold these things.
And he said: What is that monument which I see? And the men of
that city answered: It is the sepulchre of the man of God, who came from
And he said: Let him alone, let no man move his bones. So his
bones were left untouched with the bones of the prophet, that came out
of Samaria.
Moreover all the temples of the high places which were in the
cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the
that he had done in Bethel.
And he slew all the priests of the high places, that were there,
upon the altars; and he burnt men's bones upon them: and returned to
And he commanded all the people, saying: Keep the Phase to the
Now there was no such a Phase kept from the days of the judges,
who judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, and of
the kings of Juda,
As was this Phase, that was kept to the Lord in Jerusalem, in the
eighteenth year of king Josias.
Moreover the diviners by spirits, and soothsayers, and the
figures of idols, and the uncleannesses, and the abominations, that had
been in the land of Juda and Jerusalem, Josias took away: that he might
perform the words of the law, that were written in the book, which
There was no king before him like unto him, that returned to the
strength, according to all the law of Moses: neither after him did there
arise any like unto him.
But yet the Lord turned not away from the wrath of his great
indignation, wherewith his anger was kindled against Juda: because of
the provocations, wherewith Manasses had provoked him.
And the Lord said: I will remove Juda also from before my face,
as I have removed Israel: and I will cast off this city Jerusalem, which
Now the rest of the acts of Josias, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
In his days Pharao Nechao, king of Egypt, went up against the
king of Assyria to the river Euphrates: and king Josias went to meet
him: and was slain at Mageddo, when he had seen him.
And his servants carried him dead from Mageddo: and they brought
him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre. And the people of
the land took Joachaz, the son of Josias: and they anointed him, and
made him king in his father's stead.
Joachaz was three and twenty years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned three months in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was
And he did evil before the Lord, according to all that his
fathers had done.
And Pharao Nechao bound him at Rebla, which is in the land of
land, of a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
And Pharao Nechao made Eliacim, the son of Josias, king in the
room of Josias his father: and turned his name to Joakim. And he took
And Joakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharao, after he had
taxed the land for every man, to contribute according to the commandment
of Pharao: and he exacted both the silver and the gold of the people of
the land, of every man according to his ability: to give to Pharao
Joakim was five and twenty years old when he began to reign: and
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Zebida,
the daughter of Phadaia, of Ruma.
And he did evil before the Lord according to all that his fathers
had done.
In his days Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon came up, and Joakim
became his servant three years: then again he rebelled against him.
And the Lord sent against him the rovers of the Chaldees, and the
rovers of Syria, and the rovers of Moab, and the rovers of the children
of Ammon: and he sent them against Juda, to destroy it, according to the
word of the Lord, which he had spoken by his servants, the prophets.
men, who pillaged and plundered wherever they came.
And this came by the word of the Lord against Juda, to remove them
from before him for all the sins of Manasses which he did;
And for the innocent blood that he shed, filling Jerusalem with
innocent blood: and therefore the Lord would not be appeased.
But the rest of the acts of Joakim, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the words of the days of the kings of Juda?
And Joachin, his son, reigned in his stead.
And the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his own
country: for the king of Babylon had taken all that had belonged to the
king of Egypt, from the river of Egypt, unto the river Euphrates.
Joachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned three months in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Nohesta,
the daughter of Elnathan, of Jerusalem.
And he did evil before the Lord, according to all that his father
had done.
At that time the servants of Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon,
came up against Jerusalem, and the city was surrounded with their forts.
And Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon, came to the city, with his
servants, to assault it.
And Joachin, king of Juda, went out to the king of Babylon, he,
and his mother, and his servants, and his nobles, and his eunuchs: and
the king of Babylon received him in the eighth year of his reign.
And he brought out from thence all the treasures of the house of
the Lord, and the treasures of the king's house: and he cut in pieces
all the vessels of gold which Solomon, king of Israel, had made in the
temple of the Lord, according to the word of the Lord.
And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all
the valiant men of the army, to the number of ten thousand, into
captivity: and every artificer and smith: and none were left, but the
poor sort of the people of the land.
And he carried away Joachin into Babylon, and the king's mother,
and the king's wives, and his eunuchs: and the judges of the land he
carried into captivity, from Jerusalem, into Babylon.
And all the strong men, seven thousand, and the artificers, and
the smiths, a thousand, all that were valiant men, and fit for war: and
the king of Babylon led them captives into Babylon.
And he appointed Matthanias, his uncle, in his stead: and called
his name Sedecias.
Sedecias was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Amital,
the daughter of Jeremias, of Lobna.
And he did evil before the Lord, according to all that Joakim had
done.
For the Lord was angry against Jerusalem and against Juda, till
he cast them out from his face: and Sedecias revolted from the king of
the city and temple are destroyed. Godolias, who is left governor, is
slain. Joachin is exalted by Evilmerodach.
And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth
month, the tenth day of the month, that Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon,
came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem: and they surrounded it:
and raised works round about it.
And the city was shut up and besieged till the eleventh year of
king Sedecias,
The ninth day of the month: and a famine prevailed in the city,
and there was no bread for the people of the land.
And a breach was made into the city: and all the men of war fled
in the night between the two walls by the king's garden (now the
that leadeth to the plains of the wilderness.
And the army of the Chaldees pursued after the king, and overtook
him in the plains of Jericho: and all the warriors that were with him
were scattered, and left him:
So they took the king, and brought him to the king of Babylon, to
And he slew the sons of Sedecias before his face, and he put out
his eyes, and bound him with chains, and brought him to Babylon.
In the fifth month, the seventh day of the month, the same is the
nineteenth year of the king of Babylon, came Nabuzardan, commander of
the army, a servant of the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem.
And he burnt the house of the Lord, and the king's house, and the
houses of Jerusalem, and every great house he burnt with fire.
And all the army of the Chaldees, which was with the commander of
the troops, broke down the walls of Jerusalem round about.
And Nabuzardan, the commander of the army, carried away the rest
of the people, that remained in the city, and the fugitives, that had
gone over to the king of Babylon, and the remnant of the common people.
But of the poor of the land he left some dressers of vines and
husbandmen.
And the pillars of brass that were in the temple of the Lord, and
the bases, and the sea of brass, which was in the house of the Lord, the
They took away also the pots of brass, and the mazers, and the
forks, and the cups, and the mortars, and all the vessels of brass, with
which they ministered.
Moreover also the censers, and the bowls, such as were of gold in
gold: and such as were of silver in silver, the general of the army took
away.
That is, two pillars, one sea, and the bases which Solomon had
made in the temple of the Lord: the brass of all these vessels was
without weight.
One pillar was eighteen cubits high: and the chapiter of brass,
which was upon it, was three cubits high: and the network, and the
pomegranates that were upon the chapiter of the pillar, were all of
brass: and the second pillar had the like adorning.
And the general of the army took Seraias, the chief priest, and
And out of the city one eunuch, who was captain over the men of
war: and five men of them who had stood before the king, whom he found
in the city, and Sopher, the captain of the army, who exercised the
young soldiers of the people of the land: and threescore men of the
common people, who were found in the city:
These Nabuzardan, the general of the army, took away, and carried
them to the king of Babylon, to Reblatha.
And the king of Babylon smote them, and slew them at Reblatha, in
the land of Emath: so Juda was carried away out of their land.
But over the people that remained in the land of Juda, which
And when all the captains of the soldiers had heard this, they
and the men that were with them, to wit, that the king of Babylon had
made Godolias governor they came to Godolias to Maspha, Ismael, the son
of Nathanias, and Johanan, the son of Caree, and Saraia, the son of
and their men.
And Godolias swore to them and to their men, saying: Be not
afraid to serve the Chaldees: stay in the land, and serve the king of
But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ismael, the son of
him, and smote Godolias; so that he died: and also the Jews and the
And all the people, both little and great, and the captains of
the soldiers, rising up, went to Egypt, fearing the Chaldees.
And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
captivity of Joachin, king of Juda, in the twelfth month, the seven and
twentieth day of the month: Evilmerodach, king of Babylon, in the year
that he began to reign, lifted up the head of Joachin, king of Juda, out
of prison.
And he spoke kindly to him: and he set his throne above the
throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon.
And he changed his garments which he had in prison, and he ate
bread always before him, all the days of his life.
And he appointed him a continual allowance, which was also given
him by the king, day by day, all the days of his life.
is, of things left out, or omitted; because they are a kind of a
supplement of such things as were passed over in the books of the Kings.
in the Kings, under the title of the words of the days of the kings of
written after the books of Kings: but because in all probability they
have been abridged from those ancient words of the days, by Esdras or
some other sacred writer.
