the temple of God: and persecutes unto death all that will not forsake
the law of God, and the religion of their fathers.
Now it came to pass, after that Alexander the son of Philip the
He fought many battles, and took the strong holds of all, and slew
the kings of the earth:
And he went through even to the ends of the earth: and took the
spoils of many nations: and the earth was quiet before him.
And he gathered a power, and a very strong army: and his heart was
exalted and lifted up:
And he subdued countries of nations, and princes; and they became
tributaries to him.
And after these things, he fell down upon his bed, and knew that he
should die.
And he called his servants, the nobles that were brought up with
him from his youth: and he divided his kingdom among them, while he was
yet alive.
though he acknowledges that divers were of that opinion, and that it had
been delivered by some authors, lib. 10. But here we find from the
sacred text, that he was in error.
And Alexander reigned twelve years, and he died.
And his servants made themselves kings, every one in his place:
And they all put crowns upon themselves after his death, and their
sons after them, many years; and evils were multiplied in the earth.
And there came out of them a wicked root, Antiochus the
and he reigned in the hundred and thirty-seventh year of the kingdom of
the Greeks.
kingdom of the Greeks... Counting, not from the beginning of the reign
of Alexander, but from the first year of Seleucus Nicator.
In those days there went out of Israel wicked men, and they
persuaded many, saying: Let us go and make a covenant with the heathens
that are round about us: for since we departed from them, many evils
have befallen us.
And the word seemed good in their eyes.
And some of the people determined to do this, and went to the
king: and he gave them license to do after the ordinances of the
heathens.
And they built a place of exercise in Jerusalem, according to the
laws of the nations:
And they made themselves prepuces, and departed from the holy
covenant, and joined themselves to the heathens, and were sold to do
evil:
And the kingdom was established before Antiochus, and he had a
mind to reign over the land of Egypt, that he might reign over two
kingdoms.
And he entered into Egypt with a great multitude, with chariots,
and elephants, and horsemen, and a great number of ships:
And he made war against Ptolemee king of Egypt; but Ptolemee was
afraid at his presence and fled, and many were wounded unto death.
And he took the strong cities in the land of Egypt: and he took
the spoils of the land of Egypt.
And after Antiochus had ravaged Egypt, in the hundred and forty-
third year, he returned and went up against Israel.
And he went up to Jerusalem, with a great multitude.
And he proudly entered into the sanctuary, and took away the
golden altar, and the candlestick of light, and all the vessels thereof,
and the table of proposition, and the pouring vessels, and the vials,
and the little mortars of gold, and the veil, and the crowns, and the
golden ornament that was before the temple: and he broke them all in
pieces.
And he took the silver and gold, and the precious vessels: and he
took the hidden treasures, which he found: and when he had taken all
away, he departed into his own country.
And he made a great slaughter of men, and spoke very proudly.
And there was great mourning in Israel, and in every place where
they were:
And the princes, and the ancients mourned, and the virgins and the
young men were made feeble, and the beauty of the women was changed.
Every bridegroom took up lamentation: and the bride that sat in
the marriage bed, mourned:
And the land was moved for the inhabitants thereof, and all the
house of Jacob was covered with confusion.
And after two full years, the king sent the chief collector of his
tributes to the cities of Juda, and he came to Jerusalem with a great
multitude.
And he spoke to them peaceable words in deceit; and they believed
him.
And he fell upon the city suddenly, and struck it with a great
slaughter, and destroyed much people in Israel.
And he took the spoils of the city, and burnt it with fire, and
threw down the houses thereof, and the walls thereof round about:
And they took the women captive, and the children, and the
cattle they possessed.
And they built the city of David with a great and strong wall, and
with strong towers, and made it a fortress for them:
And they placed there a sinful nation, wicked men, and they
fortified themselves therein: and they stored up armour and victuals,
and gathered together the spoils of Jerusalem;
And laid them up there: and they became a great snare.
And this was a place to lie in wait against the sanctuary, and an
evil devil in Israel.
as the evil spirit is always watching and seeking whom he may devour.
And they shed innocent blood round about the sanctuary, and
defiled the holy place.
And the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled away by reason of them and
the city was made the habitation of strangers, and she became a stranger
to her own seed, and her children forsook her.
Her sanctuary was desolate like a wilderness, her festival days
were turned into mourning, her sabbaths into reproach, her honours were
brought to nothing.
Her dishonour was increased according to her glory, and her
excellency was turned into mourning.
And king Antiochus wrote to all his kingdom, that all the people
should be one: and every one should leave his own law.
And all nations consented, according to the word of king
And many of Israel consented to his service, and they sacrificed to
idols, and profaned the sabbath.
And the king sent letters by the hands of messengers to Jerusalem,
and to all the cities of Juda; that they should follow the law of the
nations of the earth.
And should forbid holocausts and sacrifices, and atonements to be
made in the temple of God.
And should prohibit the sabbath, and the festival days to be
celebrated.
And he commanded the holy places to be profaned, and the holy
people of Israel.
And he commanded altars to be built, and temples, and idols, and
swine's flesh to be immolated, and unclean beasts,
And that they should leave their children uncircumcised, and let
their souls be defiled with all uncleannesses, and abominations, to the
end that they should forget the law, and should change all the
justifications of God.
And that whosoever would not do according to the word of king
According to all these words he wrote to his whole kingdom: and he
appointed rulers over the people that should force them to do these
things.
And they commanded the cities of Juda to sacrifice.
Then many of the people were gathered to them that had forsaken
the law of the Lord: and they committed evils in the land:
And they drove away the people of Israel into lurking holes, and
into the secret places of fugitives.
On the fifteenth day of the month, Casleu, in the hundred and
forty-fifth year, king Antiochus set up the abominable idol of
desolation upon the altar of God, and they built altars throughout all
the cities of Juda round about:
And they burnt incense, and sacrificed at the doors of the houses
and in the streets.
And they cut in pieces, and burnt with fire the books of the law
of God:
And every one with whom the books of the testament of the Lord
were found, and whosoever observed the law of the Lord, they put to
death, according to the edict of the king.
Thus by their power did they deal with the people of Israel, that
were found in the cities month after month.
And on the five and twentieth day of the month they sacrificed
upon the altar of the idol that was over against the altar of God.
Now the women that circumcised their children were slain according
to the commandment of king Antiochus,
And they hanged the children about their neck in all their houses:
and those that had circumcised them, they put to death.
And many of the people of Israel determined with themselves, that
they would not eat unclean things: and they chose rather to die, than to
be defiled with unclean meats:
And they would not break the holy law of God and they were put to
death:
And there was very great wrath upon the people.
1 Machabees Chapter 2.
death.
In those days arose Mathathias, the son of John, the son of Simeon,
a priest of the sons of Joarib, from Jerusalem, and he abode in the
mountain of Modin:
And he had five sons: John, who was surnamed Gaddis:
And Simon, who was surnamed Thasi;
And Judas, who was called Machabeus;
And Eleazar, who was surnamed Abaron; and Jonathan, who was
surnamed Apphus.
These saw the evils that were done in the people of Juda, and in
And Mathathias said: Woe is me, wherefore was I born to see the
ruin of my people, and the ruin of the holy city, and to dwell there,
when it is given into the hands of the enemies?
The holy places are come into the hands of strangers her temple is
become as a man without honour.
The vessels of her glory are carried away captive; her old men are
murdered in the streets, and her young men are fallen by the sword of
the enemies.
What nation hath not inherited her kingdom, and gotten of her
spoils?
All her ornaments are taken away. She that was free is made a
slave.
And behold our sanctuary, and our beauty, and our glory is laid
waste, and the Gentiles have defiled them.
To what end then should we live any longer?
And Mathathias and his sons rent their garments, and they covered
themselves with haircloth, and made great lamentation.
And they that were sent from king Antiochus, came thither, to
compel them that were fled into the city of Modin, to sacrifice, and to
burn incense, and to depart from the law of God.
And many of the people of Israel consented and came to them: but
And they that were sent from Antiochus, answering, said to
city, and adorned with sons, and brethren.
Therefore, come thou first, and obey the king's commandment, as
all nations have done, and the men of Juda, and they that remain in
friends, and enriched with gold, and silver, and many presents.
Then Mathathias answered, and said with a loud voice: Although all
nations obey king Antiochus, so as to depart every man from the service
of the law of his fathers, and consent to his commandments:
I and my sons, and my brethren will obey the law of our fathers.
God be merciful unto us: it is not profitable for us to forsake
the law, and the justices of God:
We will not hearken to the words of king Antiochus, neither will
we sacrifice and transgress the commandments of our law, to go another
way.
Now as he left off speaking these words, there came a certain Jew
in the sight of all to sacrifice to the idols upon the altar in the city
of Modin, according to the king's commandment.
And Mathathias saw, and was grieved, and his reins trembled, and
his wrath was kindled according to the judgment of the law, and running
upon him he slew him upon the altar:
Moreover the man whom king Antiochus had sent, who compelled them
to sacrifice, he slew at the same time, and pulled down the altar,
And shewed zeal for the law, as Phinees did by Zamri, the son of
And Mathathias cried out in the city with a loud voice, saying:
him follow me.
So he and his sons fled into the mountains, and left all that they
had in the city.
Then many that sought after judgment, and justice, went down into
the desert:
And they abode there, they and their children, and their wives,
and their cattle: because afflictions increased upon them.
And it was told to the king's men, and to the army that was in
king's commandment, were gone away into the secret places in the
wilderness, and that many were gone after them.
And forthwith they went out towards them, and made war against
them on the sabbath day.
And they said to them: Do you still resist? come forth, and do
according to the edict of king Antiochus, and you shall live.
And they said: We will not come forth, neither will we obey the
king's edict, to profane the sabbath day.
And they made haste to give them battle.
But they answered them not, neither did they cast a stone at them,
nor stopped up the secret places,
Saying: Let us all die in our innocency: and heaven and earth
shall be witnesses for us, that you put us to death wrongfully.
So they gave them battle on the sabbath: and they were slain, with
their wives, and their children, and their cattle, to the number of a
thousand persons.
And Mathathias and his friends heard of it, and they mourned for
them exceedingly.
And every man said to his neighbour: If we shall all do as our
brethren have done, and not fight against the heathens for our lives,
and our justifications, they will now quickly root us out of the earth.
And they determined in that day, saying: Whosoever shall come up
against us to fight on the sabbath day, we will fight against him: and
we will not all die, as our brethren that were slain in the secret
places.
Then was assembled to them the congregation of the Assideans, the
stoutest of Israel, every one that had a good will for the law.
zealous for the law and worship of God.
And all they that fled from the evils, joined themselves to them,
and were a support to them.
And they gathered an army, and slew the sinners in their wrath,
and the wicked men in their indignation: and the rest fled to the
nations for safety.
And Mathathias and his friends went round about, and they threw
down the altars:
And they circumcised all the children whom they found in the
confines of Israel that were uncircumcised: and they did valiantly.
And they pursued after the children of pride, and the work
prospered in their hands:
And they recovered the law out of the hands of the nations, and
out of the hands of the kings: and they yielded not the horn to the
sinner.
of Antiochus, that man of sin, to abolish the law and religion of God.
Now the days drew near that Mathathias should die, and he said to
his sons: Now hath pride and chastisement gotten strength, and the time
of destruction, and the wrath of indignation:
Now, therefore, O my sons, be ye zealous for the law, and give
your lives for the covenant of your fathers.
And call to remembrance the works of the fathers, which they have
done in their generations: and you shall receive great glory, and an
everlasting name.
Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation, and it was reputed
to him unto justice?
Joseph, in the time of his distress, kept the commandment, and he
was made lord of Egypt.
Phinees, our father, by being fervent in the zeal of God, received
the covenant of an everlasting priesthood.
Jesus, whilst he fulfilled the word, was made ruler in Israel.
Caleb, for bearing witness before the congregation, received an
inheritance.
David, by his mercy, obtained the throne of an everlasting
kingdom.
Elias, while he is full of zeal for the law, was taken up into
heaven.
Ananias and Azarias and Misael, by believing, were delivered out
of the flame.
Daniel, in his innocency, was delivered out of the mouth of the
lions.
And thus consider, through all generations: that none that trust
in him, fail in strength.
And fear not the words of a sinful man, for his glory is dung and
worms:
Today he is lifted up, and tomorrow he shall not be found, because
he is returned into his earth and his thought is come to nothing.
You, therefore, my sons, take courage, and behave manfully in the
law: for by it you shall be glorious.
And behold, I know that your brother Simon is a man of counsel:
give ear to him always, and he shall be a father to you.
And Judas Machabeus, who is valiant and strong from his youth up,
let him be the leader of your army, and he shall manage the war of the
people.
And you shall take to you all that observe the law: and revenge ye
the wrong of your people.
Render to the Gentiles their reward, and take heed to the precepts
of the law.
And he blessed them, and was joined to his fathers.
And he died in the hundred and forty-sixth year: and he was buried
by his sons in the sepulchres of his fathers, in Modin, and all Israel
mourned for him with great mourning.
people for battle by fasting and prayer.
Then his son Judas, called Machabeus, rose up in his stead.
And all his brethren helped him, and all they that had joined
themselves to his father, and they fought with cheerfulness the battle
of Israel.
And he got his people great honour, and put on a breastplate as a
giant, and girt his warlike armour about him in battles, and protected
the camp with his sword.
In his acts he was like a lion, and like a lion's whelp roaring for
his prey.
And he pursued the wicked and sought them out, and them that
troubled his people he burnt with fire:
And his enemies were driven away for fear of him, and all the
workers of iniquity were troubled: and salvation prospered in his hand.
And he grieved many kings, and made Jacob glad with his works, and
his memory is blessed for ever.
And he went through the cities of Juda, and destroyed the wicked
out of them, and turned away wrath from Israel.
And he was renowned even to the utmost part of the earth, and he
gathered them that were perishing.
And Apollonius gathered together the Gentiles, and a numerous and
great army from Samaria, to make war against Israel.
And Judas understood it, and went forth to meet him: and he
overthrew him, and killed him: and many fell down slain, and the rest
fled away.
And he took their spoils, and Judas took the sword of Apollonius,
and fought with it all his lifetime.
And Seron, captain of the army of Syria, heard that Judas had
assembled a company of the faithful, and a congregation with him,
And he said I will get me a name, and will be glorified in the
kingdom, and will overthrow Judas, and those that are with him, that
have despised the edict of the king.
And he made himself ready; and the host of the wicked went up with
him, strong succours, to be revenged of the children of Israel.
And they approached even as far as Bethoron: and Judas went forth
to meet him, with a small company.
But when they saw the army coming to meet them, they said to
multitude, and so strong, and we are ready to faint with fasting today?
And Judas said: It is an easy matter for many to be shut up in the
hands of a few: and there is no difference in the sight of the God of
heaven to deliver with a great multitude, or with a small company:
For the success of war is not in the multitude of the army, but
strength cometh from heaven.
They come against us with an insolent multitude, and with pride,
to destroy us, and our wives, and our children, and to take our spoils.
But we will fight for our lives, and our laws:
And the Lord himself will overthrow them before our face, but as
for you, fear them not.
And as soon as he had made an end of speaking, he rushed suddenly
upon them: and Seron, and his host were overthrown before him:
And he pursued him by the descent of Bethoron, even to the plain,
and there fell of them eight hundred men, and the rest fled into the
land of the Philistines.
And the fear of Judas, and of his brethren, and the dread of them,
fell upon all the nations round about them.
And his fame came to the king, and all nations told of the battles
of Judas.
Now when king Antiochus heard these words, he was angry in his
mind: and he sent, and gathered the forces of all his kingdom, an
exceeding strong army.
And he opened his treasury, and gave out pay to the army for a
year: and he commanded them, that they should be ready for all things.
And he perceived that the money of his treasures failed, and that
the tributes of the country were small, because of the dissension, and
the evil that he had brought upon the land, that he might take away the
laws of old times:
And he feared that he should not have as formerly enough for
charges and gifts, which he had given before with a liberal hand: for he
had abounded more than the kings that had been before him.
And he was greatly perplexed in mind, and purposed to go into
And he left Lysias, a nobleman of the blood royal to oversee the
affairs of the kingdom from the river Euphrates even to the river of
And to bring up his son, Antiochus, till he came again.
And he delivered to him half the army, and the elephants: and he
gave him charge concerning all that he would have done, and concerning
the inhabitants of Judea, and Jerusalem.
And that he should send an army against them to destroy and root
out the strength of Israel, and the remnant of Jerusalem, and to take
away the memory of them from that place.
And that he should settle strangers, to dwell in all their coasts,
and divide their land by lot.
So the king took the half of the army that remained, and went
forth from Antioch, the chief city of his kingdom, in the hundred and
forty-seventh year: and he passed over the river Euphrates, and went
through the higher countries.
Then Lysias chose Ptolemee, the son of Dorymenus, and Nicanor, and
And he sent with them forty thousand men, and seven thousand
horsemen: to go into the land of Juda, and to destroy it, according to
the king's orders.
So they went forth with all their power, and came, and pitched
near Emmaus, in the plain country.
And the merchants of the countries heard the fame of them: and
they took silver and gold in abundance, and servants: and they came into
the camp, to buy the children of Israel for slaves: and there were
joined to them the forces of Syria, and of the land of the strangers.
And Judas, and his brethren, saw that evils were multiplied, and
that the armies approached to their borders: and they knew the orders
the king had given to destroy the people, and utterly abolish them.
And they said, every man to his neighbour: Let us raise up the low
condition of our people, and let us fight for our people, and our
sanctuary.
And the assembly was gathered, that they might be ready for
battle, and that they might pray, and ask mercy and compassion.
Now Jerusalem was not inhabited, but was like a desert: there was
none of her children that went in or out: and the sanctuary was trodden
down: and the children of strangers were in the castle, there was the
habitation of the Gentiles: and joy was taken away from Jacob, and the
pipe and harp ceased there.
And they assembled together, and came to Maspha, over against
And they fasted that day, and put on haircloth, and put ashes upon
their heads: and they rent their garments:
And they laid open the books of the law, in which the Gentiles
searched for the likeness of their idols:
And they brought the priestly ornaments, and the first fruits and
tithes, and stirred up the Nazarites that had fulfilled their days:
And they cried with a loud voice toward heaven, saying: What shall
we do with these, and whither shall we carry them?
For thy holies are trodden down, and are profaned, and thy priests
are in mourning, and are brought low.
And behold the nations are come together against us, to destroy
us: thou knowest what they intend against us.
How shall we be able to stand before their face, unless thou, O
Then they sounded with trumpets, and cried out with a loud voice.
And after this, Judas appointed captains over the people, over
thousands, and over hundreds, and over fifties, and over tens.
And he said to them that were building houses, or had betrothed
wives, or were planting vineyards, or were fearful, that they should
return every man to his house, according to the law.
So they removed the camp, and pitched on the south side of Emmaus.
And Judas said: Gird yourselves, and be valiant men, and be ready
against the morning, that you may fight with these nations that are
assembled against us to destroy us and our sanctuary.
For it is better for us to die in battle, than to see the evils of
our nation, and of the holies:
Nevertheless, as it shall be the will of God in heaven, so be it
done.
against him with a great army, but is defeated. Judas cleanses the
temple, sets up a new altar, and fortifies the sanctuary.
Then Gorgias took five thousand men, and a thousand of the best
horsemen; and they removed out of the camp by night.
That they might come upon the camp of the Jews and strike them
suddenly: and the men that were of the castle were their guides.
And Judas heard of it, and rose up, he and the valiant men, to
attack the king's forces that were in Emmaus.
For as yet the army was dispersed from the camp
altogether encamped.
And Gorgias came by night into the camp of Judas, and found no man;
and he sought them in the mountains: for he said: These men flee from
us.
And when it was day, Judas shewed himself in the plain with three
thousand men only, who neither had armour nor swords:
And they saw the camp of the Gentiles that it was strong, and the
men in breastplates, and the horsemen round about them, and these were
trained up to war.
And Judas said to the men that were with him: Fear ye not their
multitude, neither be ye afraid of their assault.
Remember in what manner our fathers were saved in the Red Sea, when
And now let us cry to heaven, and the Lord will have mercy on us,
and will remember the covenant of our fathers, and will destroy this
army before our face this day:
And all nations shall know that there is one that redeemeth and
delivereth Israel.
And the strangers lifted up their eyes, and saw them coming
against them.
And they went out of the camp to battle, and they that were with
And they joined battle: and the Gentiles were routed, and fled
into the plain.
But all the hindmost of them fell by the sword and they pursued
them as far as Gezeron, and even to the plains of Idumea, and of Azotus,
and of Jamnia: and there fell of them to the number of three thousand
men.
And Judas returned again with his army that followed him.
And he said to the people: Be not greedy of the spoils; for there
is war before us:
And Gorgias and his army are near us in the mountain: but stand ye
now against our enemies, and overthrow them, and you shall take the
spoils afterwards with safety.
And as Judas was speaking these words, behold part of them
appeared, looking forth from the mountain.
And Gorgias saw that his men were put to flight, and that they had
set fire to the camp: for the smoke that was seen declared what was
done.
And when they had seen this, they were seized with great fear,
seeing at the same time Judas and his army in the plain ready to fight.
So they all fled away into the land of the strangers.
And Judas returned to take the spoils of the camp, and they got
much gold, and silver, and blue silk, and purple of the sea, and great
riches.
And returning home, they sung a hymn, and blessed God in heaven,
because he is good, because his mercy endureth for ever.
So Israel had a great deliverance that day.
And such of the strangers as escaped, went and told Lysias all that
had happened.
And when he heard these things, he was amazed and discouraged:
because things had not succeeded in Israel according to his mind, and as
the king had commanded.
So the year following, Lysias gathered together threescore
thousand chosen men, and five thousand horsemen, that he might subdue
them.
And they came into Judea, and pitched their tents in Bethoron, and
And they saw that the army was strong, and he prayed and said:
the mighty by the hand of thy servant David, and didst deliver up the
camp of the strangers into the hands of Jonathan the son of Saul, and of
his armour bearer.
Shut up this army in the hands of thy people Israel, and let them
be confounded in their host and their horsemen.  4:32. Strike them with
fear, and cause the boldness of their strength to languish, and let them
quake at their own destruction.
Cast them down with the sword of them that love thee: and let all
that know thy name praise thee with hymns.
And they joined battle: and there fell of the army of Lysias five
thousand men.
And when Lysias saw that his men were put to flight, and how bold
the Jews were, and that they were ready either to live, or to die
manfully, he went to Antioch, and chose soldiers, that they might come
again into Judea with greater numbers.
Then Judas, and his brethren said: Behold our enemies are
discomfited: let us go up now to cleanse the holy places, and to repair
them.
And all the army assembled together, and they went up into Mount
And they saw the sanctuary desolate, and the altar profaned, and
the gates burnt, and shrubs growing up in the courts as in a forest, or
on the mountains, and the chambers joining to the temple thrown down.
And they rent their garments, and made great lamentation, and put
ashes on their heads:
And they fell down to the ground on their faces, and they sounded
with the trumpets of alarm, and they cried towards heaven.
Then Judas appointed men to fight against them that were in the
castle, till they had cleansed the holy places,
And he chose priests without blemish, whose will was set upon the
law of God.
And they cleansed the holy places, and took away the stones that
had been defiled into an unclean place.
And he considered about the altar of holocausts that had been
profaned, what he should do with it.
And a good counsel came into their minds, to pull it down: lest it
should be a reproach to them, because the Gentiles had defiled it; so
they threw it down.
And they laid up the stones in the mountain of the temple, in a
convenient place, till there should come a prophet, and give answer
concerning them.
Then they took whole stones, according to the law and built a new
altar, according to the former:
And they built up the holy places, and the things that were within
the temple: and they sanctified the temple and the courts.
And they made new holy vessels, and brought in the candlestick,
and the altar of incense, and the table, into the temple.
And they put incense upon the altar, and lighted up the lamps that
were upon the candlestick, and they gave light in the temple.
And they set the loaves upon the table, and hung up the veils, and
finished all the works that they had begun to make.
And they arose before the morning on the five and twentieth day of
the ninth month, (which is the month of Casleu) in the hundred and
forty-eighth year.
And they offered sacrifice, according to the law, upon the new
altar of holocausts which they had made.
According to the time, and according to the day wherein the
heathens had defiled it, in the same was it dedicated anew with
canticles, and harps, and lutes, and cymbals.
And all the people fell upon their faces, and adored, and blessed
up to heaven, him that had prospered them.
And they kept the dedication of the altar eight days, and they
offered holocausts with joy, and sacrifices of salvation, and of praise.
And they adorned the front of the temple with crowns of gold, and
escutcheons, and they renewed the gates, and the chambers, and hanged
doors upon them.
And there was exceeding great joy among the people, and the
reproach of the Gentiles was turned away.
And Judas, and his brethren, and all the church of Israel decreed,
that the day of the dedication of the altar should be kept in its season
from year to year for eight days, from the five and twentieth day of the
month of Casleu, with joy and gladness.
They built up also at that time Mount Sion, with high walls, and
strong towers round about, lest the Gentiles should at any time come,
and tread it down, as they did before.
And he placed a garrison there, to keep it, and he fortified it,
to secure Bethsura, that the people might have a defence against Idumea.
them that were distressed. Josephus and Azarius, attempting contrary to
order to fight against their enemies, are defeated.
Now it came to pass, when the nations round about heard that the
altar and the sanctuary were built up, as before, that they were
exceeding angry.
And they thought to destroy the generation of Jacob that were among
them, and they began to kill some of the people, and to persecute them.
Then Judas fought against the children of Esau in Idumea, and them
that were in Acrabathane: because they beset the Israelites round about,
and he made a great slaughter of them.
And he remembered the malice of the children of Bean: who were a
snare and a stumblingblock to the people, by lying in wait for them in
the way.
And they were shut up by him in towers, and he set upon them, and
devoted them to utter destruction, and burnt their towers with fire, and
all that were in them.
Then he passed over to the children of Ammon, where he found a
mighty power, and much people, and Timotheus was their captain:
And he fought many battles with them, and they were discomfited in
their sight, and he smote them:
And he took the city of Gazer and her towns, and returned into
And the Gentiles that were in Galaad, assembled themselves together
against the Israelites that were in their quarters, to destroy them: and
they fled into the fortress of Datheman.
And they sent letters to Judas, and his brethren, saying: The
heathens that are round about are gathered together against us to
destroy us:
And they are preparing to come, and to take the fortress into
which we are fled: and Timotheus is the captain of their host.
Now therefore come, and deliver us out of their hands, for many of
us are slain.
And all our brethren that were in the places of Tubin, are killed:
and they have carried away their wives, and their children, captives,
and taken their spoils, and they have slain there almost a thousand men.
And while they were yet reading these letters, behold there came
other messengers out of Galilee with their garments rent, who related
according to these words:
Saying, that they of Ptolemais, and of Tyre, and of Sidon, were
assembled against them, and all Galilee is filled with strangers, in
order to consume us.
Now when Judas and the people heard these words, a great assembly
met together to consider what they should do for their brethren that
were in trouble, and were assaulted by them.
And Judas said to Simon, his brother: Choose thee men, and go, and
deliver thy brethren in Galilee: and I, and my brother Jonathan, will go
into the country of Galaad:
And he left Joseph, the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captains of
the people, with the remnant of the army in Judea, to keep it:
And he commanded them, saying: Take ye the charge of this people;
but make no war against the heathens, till we return.
Now three thousand men were allotted to Simon, to go into Galilee:
and eight thousand to Judas, to go into the land of Galaad.
And Simon went into Galilee, and fought many battles with the
heathens: and the heathens were discomfited before his face, and he
pursued them even to the gate of Ptolemais.
And there fell of the heathens almost three thousand men, and he
took the spoils of them.
And he took with him those that were in Galilee and in Arbatis,
with their wives, and children, and all that they had, and he brought
them into Judea with great joy.
And Judas Machabeus, and Jonathan, his brother, passed over the
And the Nabutheans met them, and received them in a peaceable
manner, and told them all that happened to their brethren in the land of
And that many of them were shut up in Barasa, and in Bosor, and in
and great cities.
Yea, and that they were kept shut up in the rest of the cities of
near to these cities, and to take them, and to destroy them all in one
day.
Then Judas and his army suddenly turned their march into the
desert, to Bosor, and took the city: and he slew every male by the edge
of the sword, and took all their spoils, and burnt it with fire.
And they removed from thence by night, and went till they came to
the fortress.
And it came to pass that early in the morning, when they lifted up
their eyes, behold there were people without number, carrying ladders
and engines to take the fortress, and assault them.
And Judas saw that the fight was begun, and the cry of the battle
went up to heaven like a trumpet, and a great cry out of the city:
And he said to his host: Fight ye today for your brethren.
And he came with three companies behind them, and they sounded
their trumpets, and cried out in prayer.
And the host of Timotheus understood that it was Machabeus, and
they fled away before his face and they made a great slaughter of them,
and there fell of them in that day almost eight thousand men.
And Judas turned aside to Maspha, and assaulted, and took it, and
he slew every male thereof, and took the spoils thereof, and burnt it
with fire.
From thence he marched, and took Casbon, and Mageth, and Bosor,
and the rest of the cities of Galaad.
But after this Timotheus gathered another army, and camped over
against Raphon, beyond the torrent.
And Judas sent men to view the army: and they brought him word,
saying: All the nations, that are round about us, are assembled unto him
an army exceeding great:
And they have hired the Arabians to help them, and they have
pitched their tents beyond the torrent, ready to come to fight against
thee. And Judas went to meet them.
And Timotheus said to the captains of his army: When Judas and his
army come near the torrent of water, if he pass over unto us first, we
shall not be able to withstand him: for he will certainly prevail over
us.
But if he be afraid to pass over, and camp on the other side of
the river, we will pass over to them, and shall prevail against him.
Now when Judas came near the torrent of water, he set the scribes
of the people by the torrent, and commanded them, saying: Suffer no man
to stay behind: but let all come to the battle.
And he passed over to them first, and all the people after him,
and all the heathens were discomfited before them, and they threw away
their weapons, and fled to the temple that was in Carnaim.
And he took that city, and the temple he burnt with fire, with all
things that were therein: and Carnaim was subdued, and could not stand
against the face of Judas.
And Judas gathered together all the Israelites that were in the
land of Galaad, from the least even to the greatest, and their wives and
children, and an army exceeding great, to come into the land of Juda.
And they came as far as Ephron: now this was a great city, situate
in the way, strongly fortified, and there was no means to turn from it
on the right hand or on the left, but the way was through the midst of
it.
And they that were in the city shut themselves in, and stopped up
the gates with stones: and Judas sent to them with peaceable words,
Saying: Let us pass through your land, to go into our own country,
and no man shall hurt you; we will only pass through on foot. But they
would not open to them.
Then Judas commanded proclamation to be made in the camp, that
they should make an assault, every man in the place where he was.
And the men of the army drew near, and he assaulted that city all
the day, and all the night; and the city was delivered into his hands:
And they slew every male with the edge of the sword, and he razed
the city, and took the spoils thereof, and passed through all the city
over them that were slain.
Then they passed over the Jordan to the great plain that is over
against Bethsan.
And Judas gathered together the hindmost, and he exhorted the
people, all the way through, till they came into the land of Juda.
And they went up to mount Sion with joy and gladness, and offered
holocausts, because not one of them was slain, till they had returned in
peace.
Now in the days that Judas and Jonathan were in the land of
Joseph, the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captain of the
soldiers, heard of the good success, and the battles that were fought,
And he said: Let us also get us a name, and let us go fight
against the Gentiles that are round about us.
And he gave charge to them that were in his army, and they went
towards Jamnia.
And Gorgias and his men went out of the city, to give them battle.
And Joseph and Azarias were put to flight, and were pursued unto
the borders of Judea: and there fell on that day, of the people of
people:
Because they did not hearken to Judas and his brethren, thinking
that they should do manfully.
But they were not of the seed of those men by whom salvation was
brought to Israel.
And the men of Juda were magnified exceedingly in the sight of all
And the people assembled to them with joyful acclamations.
Then Judas and his brethren went forth and attacked the children
of Esau, in the land towards the south, and he took Chebron and her
towns: and he burnt the walls thereof, and the towers all round it.
And he removed his camp to go into the land of the aliens, and he
went through Samaria.
In that day some priests fell in battle, while desiring to do
manfully they went out unadvisedly to fight.
And Judas turned to Azotus, into the land of the strangers, and he
threw down their altars, and he burnt the statues of their gods with
fire: and he took the spoils of the cities, and returned into the land
of Juda.
with the Jews.
Now king Antiochus was going through the higher countries, and he
heard that the city of Elymais in Persia, was greatly renowned, and
abounding in silver and gold,
And that there was in it a temple exceeding rich; and coverings of
gold, and breastplates, and shields, which king Alexander, son of
So he came, and sought to take the city and to pillage it; but he
was not able, because the design was known to them that were in the
city.
And they rose up against him in battle, and he fled away from
thence, and departed with great sadness, and returned towards Babylonia.
And whilst he was in Persia there came one that told him how the
armies that were in the land of Juda were put to flight:
And that Lysias went with a very great power, and was put to flight
before the face of the Jews, and that they were grown strong by the
armour, and power, and store of spoils which they had gotten out of the
camps which they had destroyed:
And that they had thrown down the abomination which he had set up
upon the altar in Jerusalem, and that they had compassed about the
sanctuary with high walls as before, and Bethsura also, his city.
And it came to pass, when the king heard these words, that he was
struck with fear, and exceedingly moved: and he laid himself down upon
his bed, and fell sick for grief, because it had not fallen out to him
as he imagined.
And he remained there many days: for great grief came more and more
upon him, and he made account that he should die.
And he called for all his friends, and said to them: Sleep is gone
from my eyes, and I am fallen away, and my heart is cast down for
anxiety:
And I said in my heart: Into how much tribulation am I come, and
into what floods of sorrow wherein now I am: I that was pleasant and
beloved in my power!
But now I remember the evils that I did in Jerusalem, from whence
also I took away all the spoils of gold, and of silver, that were in it,
and I sent to destroy the inhabitants of Juda without cause.
I know, therefore, that for this cause these evils have found me:
and behold I perish with great grief in a strange land.
Then he called Philip, one of his friends, and he made him regent
over all his kingdom.
And he gave him the crown, and his robe, and his ring, that he
should go to Antiochus, his son, and should bring him up for the
kingdom.
So king Antiochus died there in the year one hundred and forty-
nine.
And Lysias understood that the king was dead, and he set up
called his name Eupator.
Now they that were in the castle, had shut up the Israelites round
about the holy places: and they were continually seeking their hurt, and
to strengthen the Gentiles.
And Judas purposed to destroy them: and he called together all the
people, to besiege them.
And they came together, and besieged them in the year one hundred
and fifty, and they made battering slings and engines.
And some of the besieged got out: and some wicked men of Israel
joined themselves unto them.
And they went to the king, and said: How long dost thou delay to
execute judgment, and to revenge our brethren?
We determined to serve thy father, and to do according to his
orders, and obey his edicts:
And for this they of our nation are alienated from us, and have
slain as many of us as they could find, and have spoiled our
inheritances.
Neither have they put forth their hand against us only, but also
against all our borders.
And behold they have approached this day to the castle of
And unless thou speedily prevent them, they will do greater things
than these, and thou shalt not be able to subdue them.
Now when the king heard this, he was angry: and he called together
all his friends, and the captains of his army, and them that were over
the horsemen.
There came also to him from other realms, and from the islands of
the sea, hired troops.
And the number of his army was an hundred thousand footmen, and
twenty thousand horsemen, and thirty-two elephants trained to battle.
And they went through Idumea, and approached to Bethsura, and
fought many days, and they made engines: but they sallied forth, and
burnt them with fire, and fought manfully.
forth and burnt them, that is, burnt the engines of the besiegers.
And Judas departed from the castle, and removed the camp to
And the king rose before it was light, and made his troops march
on fiercely towards the way of Bethzacharam: and the armies made
themselves ready for the battle, and they sounded the trumpets:
And they shewed the elephants the blood of grapes, and mulberries,
to provoke them to fight.
And they distributed the beasts by the legions: and there stood by
every elephant a thousand men in coats of mail, and with helmets of
brass on their heads: and five hundred horsemen set in order were chosen
for every beast.
These before the time wheresoever the beast was they were there:
and whithersoever it went, they went, and they departed not from it.
And upon the beast, there were strong wooden towers which covered
every one of them: and engines upon them, and upon every one thirty-two
valiant men, who fought from above: and an Indian to rule the beast.
And the rest of the horsemen he placed on this side and on that
side, at the two wings, with trumpets to stir up the army, and to hasten
them forward that stood thick together in the legions thereof.
Now when the sun shone upon the shields of gold, and of brass, the
mountains glittered therewith, and they shone like lamps of fire.
And part of the king's army was distinguished by the high
mountains, and the other part by the low places: and they marched on
warily and orderly.
And all the inhabitants of the land were moved at the noise of
their multitude, and the marching of the company, and the rattling of
the armour, for the army was exceeding great and strong.
And Judas and his army drew near for battle: and there fell of the
king's army six hundred men.
And Eleazar, the son of Saura, saw one of the beasts harnessed
with the king's harness: and it was higher than the other beasts; and it
seemed to him that the king was on it:
And he exposed himself to deliver his people, and to get himself
an everlasting name.
And he ran up to it boldly in the midst of the legion, killing on
the right hand, and on the left, and they fell by him on this side and
that side.
And he went between the feet of the elephant, and put himself
under it: and slew it, and it fell to the ground upon him, and he died
there.
Then they seeing the strength of the king and the fierceness of
his army, turned away from them.
But the king's army went up against them to Jerusalem: and the
king's army pitched their tents against Judea and Mount Sion.
And he made peace with them that were in Bethsura: and they came
forth out of the city, because they had no victuals, being shut up
there, for it was the year of rest to the land.
And the king took Bethsura: and he placed there a garrison to keep
it.
And he turned his army against the sanctuary for many days: and he
set up there battering slings, and engines, and instruments to cast
fire, and engines to cast stones and javelins, and pieces to shoot
arrows, and slings.
And they also made engines against their engines, and they fought
for many days.
But there were no victuals in the city, because it was the seventh
year: and such as had stayed in Judea of them that came from among the
nations, had eaten the residue of all that which had been stored up.
And there remained in the holy places but a few, for the famine
had prevailed over them: and they were dispersed every man to his own
place.
Now Lysias heard that Philip; whom king Antiochus while he lived
had appointed to bring up his son, Antiochus, and to reign,
Was returned from Persia, and Media, with the army that went with
him and that he sought to take upon him the affairs of the kingdom:
Wherefore he made haste to go, and say to the king and to the
captains of the army: We decay daily, and our provision of victuals is
small, and the place that we lay siege to is strong, and it lieth upon
us to take order for the affairs of the kingdom.
Now, therefore, let us come to an agreement with these men, and
make peace with them and with all their nation.
And let us covenant with them, that they may live according to
their own laws, as before. For because of our despising their laws, they
have been provoked, and have done all these things.
And the proposal was acceptable in the sight of the king, and of
the princes: and he sent to them to make peace: and they accepted of it.
And the king and the princes swore to them: and they came out of
the strong hold.
Then the king entered into Mount Sion, and saw the strength of the
place: and he quickly broke the oath that he had taken, and gave
commandment to throw down the wall round about.
And he departed in haste and returned to Antioch, where he found
In the hundred and fifty-first year, Demetrius, the son of
a city of the sea coast, and reigned there.
And it came to pass as he entered into the house of the kingdom of
his fathers, that the army seized upon Antiochus, and Lysias, to bring
them unto him.
And when he knew it, he said: Let me not see their face.
So the army slew them. And Demetrius sat upon the throne of his
kingdom:
And there came to him the wicked and ungodly men of Israel: and
And they accused the people to the king, saying: Judas and his
brethren have destroyed all thy friends, and he hath driven us out of
our land.
Now, therefore, send some men whom thou trustest, and let him go,
and see all the havoc he hath made amongst us, and in the king's lands:
and let him punish all his friends and their helpers.
Then the king chose Bacchides, one of his friends, that ruled
beyond the great river in the kingdom, and was faithful to the king: and
he sent him,
To see the havoc that Judas had made: and the wicked Alcimus he
made high priest, and commanded him to take revenge upon the children of
And they arose, and came with a great army into the land of Juda:
and they sent messengers, and spoke to Judas and his brethren with
peaceable words, deceitfully.
But they gave no heed to their words: for they saw that they were
come with a great army.
Then there assembled to Alcimus and Bacchides a company of the
scribes, to require things that are just:
And first the Assideans, that were among the children of Israel,
and they sought peace of them.
For they said: One that is a priest of the seed of Aaron is come,
he will not deceive us.
And he spoke to them peaceably: and he swore to them, saying: We
will do you no harm, nor your friends.
And they believed him. And he took threescore of them, and slew
them in one day, according to the word that is written:
The flesh of thy saints, and the blood of them they have shed
round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them.
Then fear and trembling fell upon all the people: for they said:
covenant, and the oath which they made.
And Bacchides removed the camp from Jerusalem, and pitched in
him, and some of the people he killed, and threw them into a great pit.
Then he committed the country to Alcimus, and left with him troops
to help him. So Bacchides went away to the king.
But Alcimus did what he could to maintain his chief priesthood.
And they that disturbed the people resorted to him, and they got
the land of Juda into their power, and did much hurt in Israel.
And Judas saw all the evils that Alcimus, and they that were with
him, did to the children of Israel, much more than the Gentiles.
And he went out into all the coasts of Judea round about, and took
vengeance upon the men that had revolted, and they ceased to go forth
any more into the country.
And Alcimus saw that Judas and they that were with him, prevailed:
and he knew that he could not stand against them, and he went back to
the king, and accused them of many crimes.
And the king sent Nicanor, one of his principal lords, who was a
great enemy to Israel: and he commanded him to destroy the people.
And Nicanor came to Jerusalem with a great army, and he sent to
Saying: Let there be no fighting between me and you: I will come
with a few men, to see your faces with peace.
And he came to Judas, and they saluted one another peaceably: and
the enemies were prepared to take away Judas by force.
And the thing was known to Judas that he was come to him with
deceit: and he was much afraid of him, and would not see his face any
more.
And Nicanor knew that his counsel was discovered: and he went out
to fight against Judas, near Capharsalama.
And there fell of Nicanor's army almost five thousand men, and
they fled into the city of David.
And after this Nicanor went up into mount Sion: and some of the
priests and the people came out to salute him peaceably, and to shew him
the holocausts that were offered for the king.
But he mocked and despised them, and abused them: and he spoke
proudly,
And swore in anger, saying: Unless Judas and his army be delivered
into my hands, as soon as ever I return in peace, I will burn this
house. And he went out in a great rage.
And the priests went in, and stood before the face of the altar
and the temple: and weeping, they said:
Thou, O Lord, hast chosen this house for thy name to be called
upon therein, that it might be a house of prayer and supplication for
thy people.
Be avenged of this man, and his army, and let them fall by the
sword: remember their blasphemies, and suffer them not to continue any
longer.
Then Nicanor went out from Jerusalem, and encamped near to
But Judas pitched in Adarsa with three thousand men: and Judas
prayed, and said:
O Lord, when they that were sent by king Sennacherib blasphemed
thee, an angel went out, and slew of them a hundred and eighty-five
thousand:
Even so destroy this army in our sight today and let the rest know
that he hath spoken ill against thy sanctuary: and judge thou him
according to his wickedness.
And the armies joined battle on the thirteenth day of the month,
slain in the battle.
And when his army saw that Nicanor was slain they threw away their
weapons, and fled:
And they pursued after them one day's journey from Adazer, even
till ye come to Gazara, and they sounded the trumpets after them with
signals.
And they went forth out of all the towns of Judea round about, and
they pushed them with the horns, and they turned again to them, and they
were all slain with the sword, and there was not left of them so much as
one.
And they took the spoils of them for a booty, and they cut off
and they brought it, and hung it up over against Jerusalem.
And the people rejoiced exceedingly, and they spent that day with
great joy.
And he ordained that this day should be kept every year, being the
thirteenth of the month of Adar.
And the land of Juda was quiet for a short time.
them.
Now Judas heard of the fame of the Romans, that they are powerful
and strong, and willingly agree to all things that are requested of
them: and that whosoever have come to them, they have made amity with
them, and that they are mighty in power.
And they heard of their battles, and their noble acts which they
had done in Galatia, how they had conquered them, and brought them under
tribute:
the ancient Romans, is not an assertion, or affirmation of the sacred
writer: but only a relation of what Judas had heard of them.
And how great things they had done in the land of Spain, and that
they had brought under their power the mines of silver and of gold that
are there, and had gotten possession of all the place by their counsel
and patience:
And had conquered places that were very far off from them, and
kings that came against them from the ends of the earth, and had
overthrown them with great slaughter: and the rest pay them tribute
every year.
And that they had defeated in battle Philip and Perses the king of
the Ceteans, and the rest that had borne arms against them, and had
conquered them:
And how Antiochus, the great king of Asia, who went to fight
against them, having a hundred and twenty elephants, with horsemen, and
chariots, and a very great army, was routed by them.
And how they took him alive, and appointed to him, that both he and
they that should reign after him, should pay a great tribute, and that
he should give hostages, and that which was agreed upon,
And the country of the Indians, and of the Medes, and of the
from them, they gave to king Eumenes.
And that they who were in Greece, had a mind to go and to destroy
them: and they had knowledge thereof,
And they sent a general against them, and fought with them, and
many of them were slain, and they carried away their wives, and their
children captives, and spoiled them, and took possession of their land,
and threw down their walls, and brought them to be their servants unto
this day.
And the other kingdoms, and islands, that at any time had resisted
them, they had destroyed and brought under their power.
But with their friends, and such as relied upon them, they kept
amity, and had conquered kingdoms that were near, and that were far off:
for all that heard their name, were afraid of them.
That whom they had a mind to help to a kingdom, those reigned: and
whom they would, they deposed from the kingdom: and they were greatly
exalted.
And none of all these wore a crown, or was clothed in purple, to
be magnified thereby.
And that they had made themselves a senate house, and consulted
daily three hundred and twenty men, that sat in counsel always for the
people, that they might do the things that were right:
And that they committed their government to one man every year, to
rule over all their country, and they all obey one, and there is no envy
nor jealousy amongst them.
each in his day.-Ibid. No envy, etc... So Judas had heard: and it was so
far true, with regard to the ancient Romans, that as yet no envy or
jealousy had divided them into such open factions and civil wars, as
they afterwards experienced in the time of Marius and Sylla, etc.
So Judas chose Eupolemus, the son of John, the son of Jacob, and
amity and confederacy with them:
And that they might take off from them the yoke of the Grecians,
for they saw that they oppressed the kingdom of Israel with servitude.
And they went to Rome, a very long journey, and they entered into
the senate house, and said:
Judas Machabeus, and his brethren, and the people of the Jews,
have sent us to you to make alliance and peace with you, and that we may
be registered your confederates and friends.
And the proposal was pleasing in their sight.
And this is the copy of the writing that they wrote back again,
graven in tables of brass, and sent to Jerusalem, that it might be with
them there for a memorial of the peace, and alliance.  8:23. GOOD
land, for ever: and far be the sword and enemy from them.
But if there come first any war upon the Romans, or any of their
confederates, in all their dominions:
The nation of the Jews shall help them according as the time shall
direct, with all their heart:
Neither shall they give them, whilst they are fighting, or furnish
them with wheat, or arms, or money, or ships, as it hath seemed good to
the Romans: and they shall obey their orders, without taking any thing
of them.
In like manner also if war shall come first upon the nation of the
time shall permit them:
And there shall not be given to them that come to their aid,
either wheat, or arms, or money, or ships, as it hath seemed good to the
According to these articles did the Romans covenant with the
people of the Jews.
And, if after this, one party or the other shall have a mind to
add to these articles, or take away any thing, they may do it at their
pleasure: and whatsoever they shall add, or take away, shall be
ratified.
Moreover, concerning the evils that Demetrius, the king, hath done
against them, we have written to him, saying: Why hast thou made thy
yoke heavy upon our friends and allies, the Jews.
If, therefore, they come again to us complaining of thee, we will
do them justice, and will make war against thee by sea and land.
hundred men and is slain. Jonathan succeeds him and revenges the murder
of his brother John. He fights against Bacchides. Alcimus dies
miserably. Bacchides besieges Bethbessen. He is forced to raise the
siege and leave the country.
In the mean time, when Demetrius heard that Nicanor and his army
were fallen in battle, he sent again Bacchides and Alcimus into Judea;
and the right wing of his army with them.
And they took the road that leadeth to Galgal, and they camped in
and slew many people.
In the first month of the hundred and fifty-second year they
brought the army to Jerusalem:
And they arose and went to Berea, with twenty thousand men, and two
thousand horsemen.
Now Judas had pitched his tents in Laisa, and three thousand chosen
men with him:
And they saw the multitude of the army that they were many, and
they were seized with great fear: and many withdrew themselves out of
the camp, and there remained of them no more than eight hundred men.
And Judas saw that his army slipped away, and the battle pressed
upon him, and his heart was cast down: because he had not time to gather
them together, and he was discouraged.
Then he said to them that remained: Let us arise, and go against
our enemies, if we may be able to fight against them.
But they dissuaded him, saying: We shall not be able, but let us
save our lives now, and return to our brethren, and then we will fight
against them: for we are but few.
Then Judas said: God forbid we should do this thing, and flee away
from them: but if our time be come, let us die manfully for our
brethren, and let us not stain our glory.
And the army removed out of the camp, and they stood over against
them: and the horsemen were divided into two troops, and the slingers,
and the archers, went before the army, and they that were in the front
were all men of valour.
And Bacchides was in the right wing, and the legion drew near on
two sides, and they sounded the trumpets:
And they also that were on Judas's side, even they also cried out,
and the earth shook at the noise of the armies: and the battle was
fought from morning even unto the evening.
And Judas perceived that the stronger part of the army of
together with him:
And the right wing was discomfited by them, and he pursued them
even to the mount Azotus.
And they that were in the left wing saw that the right wing was
discomfited, and they followed after Judas, and them that were with him,
at their back:
And the battle was hard fought, and there fell many wounded of the
one side and of the other.
And Judas was slain, and the rest fled away.
And Jonathan and Simon took Judas, their brother, and buried him
in the sepulchre of their fathers, in the city of Modin.
And all the people of Israel bewailed him with great lamentation,
and they mourned for him many days.
And said: How is the mighty man fallen, that saved the people of
But the rest of the words of the wars of Judas, and of the noble
acts that he did, and of his greatness, are not written: for they were
very many.
And it came to pass, after the death of Judas, that the wicked
began to put forth their heads in all the confines of Israel, and all
the workers of iniquity rose up.
In those days there was a very great famine, and they and all
their country yielded to Bacchides.
And Bacchides chose the wicked men, and made them lords of the
country:
And they sought out, and made diligent search after the friends of
abused them.
And there was a great tribulation in Israel, such as was not since
the day, that there was no prophet seen in Israel.
And all the friends of Judas came together, and said to Jonathan:
Since thy brother Judas died there is not a man like him to go
forth against our enemies, Bacchides, and them that are the enemies of
our nation.
Now, therefore, we have chosen thee this day to be our prince, and
captain, in his stead, to fight our battles.
So Jonathan took upon him the government at that time, and rose up
in the place of Judas, his brother.
And Bacchides had knowledge of it, and sought to kill him.
And Jonathan, and Simon, his brother, knew it, and all that were
with them: and they fled into the desert of Thecua, and they pitched by
the water of the lake Asphar,
And Bacchides understood it, and he came himself, with all his
army, over the Jordan, on the sabbath day.
And Jonathan sent his brother, a captain of the people, to desire
the Nabutheans his friends, that they would lend them their equipage,
which was copious.
And the children of Jambri came forth out of Madaba, and took
After this it was told Jonathan, and Simon, his brother, that the
children of Jambri made a great marriage, and were bringing the bride
out of Madaba, the daughter of one of the great princes of Chanaan, with
great pomp.
And they remembered the blood of John, their brother: and they
went up, and hid themselves under the covert of the mountain.
And they lifted up their eyes, and saw: and behold a tumult, and
great preparation: and the bridegroom came forth, and his friends, and
his brethren to meet them with timbrels, and musical instruments and
many weapons.
And they rose up against them from the place where they lay in
ambush, and slew them, and there fell many wounded, and the rest fled
into the mountains, and they took all their spoils:
And the marriage was turned into mourning, and the noise of their
musical instruments into lamentation.
And they took revenge for the blood of their brother: and they
returned to the bank of the Jordan.
And Bacchides heard it, and he came on the sabbath day even to the
bank of the Jordan, with a great power.
And Jonathan said to his company: Let us arise, and fight against
our enemies: for it is not now as yesterday, and the day before.
For behold the battle is before us, and the water of the Jordan on
this side and on that side, and banks, and marshes, and woods: and there
is no place for us to turn aside.
Now, therefore, cry ye to heaven, that ye may be delivered from
the hand of your enemies. And they joined battle.
And Jonathan stretched forth his hand to strike Bacchides, but he
turned away from him backwards.
And Jonathan, and they that were with him, leapt into the Jordan,
and swam over the Jordan to them.
And there fell of Bacchides' side that day a thousand men: and
they returned to Jerusalem,
And they built strong cities in Judea, the fortress that was in
and Phara, and Thopo, with high walls, and gates, and bars.
And he placed garrisons in them, that they might wage war against
And he fortified the city of Bethsura, and Gazara, and the castle,
and set garrisons in them, and provisions of victuals:
And he took the sons of the chief men of the country for hostages,
and put them in the castle in Jerusalem in custody.
Now in the year one hundred and fifty-three, the second month,
thrown down, and the works of the prophets to be destroyed: and he began
to destroy.
At that time Alcimus was struck: and his works were hindered,
and his mouth was stopped, and he was taken with a palsy, so that he
could no more speak a word, nor give order concerning his house.
And Alcimus died at that time in great torment.
And Bacchides saw that Alcimus was dead: and he returned to the
king, and the land was quiet for two years.
And all the wicked held a council, saying: Behold Jonathan, and
they that are with him, dwell at ease and without fear: now, therefore,
let us bring Bacchides hither, and he shall take them all in one night.
So they went, and gave him counsel.
And he arose to come with a great army: and he sent secretly
letters to his adherents that were in Judea to seize upon Jonathan, and
them that were with him: but they could not, for their design was known
to them.
And he apprehended of the men of the country, that were the
principal authors of the mischief, fifty men, and he slew them.
And Jonathan, and Simon, and they that were with him, retired into
thereof, and they fortified it.
And when Bacchides knew it, he gathered together all his
multitude: and sent word to them that were of Judea.
And he came, and camped above Bethbessen, and fought against it
many days, and made engines.
But Jonathan left his brother, Simon, in the city and went forth
into the country, and came with a number of men,
And struck Odares, and his brethren, and the children of Phaseron,
in their tents, and he began to slay, and to increase in forces.
But Simon, and they that were with him, sallied out of the city,
and burnt the engines,
And they fought against Bacchides, and he was discomfited by them:
and they afflicted him exceedingly, for his counsel, and his enterprise
was in vain.
And he was angry with the wicked men that had given him counsel to
come into their country, and he slew many of them: and he purposed to
return with the rest into their country.
And Jonathan had knowledge of it, and he sent ambassadors to him
to make peace with him, and to restore to him the prisoners.
And he accepted it willingly, and did according to his words, and
swore that he would do him no harm all the days of his life.
And he restored to him the prisoners which he before had taken out
of the land of Juda: and he returned, and went away into his own
country, and he came no more into their borders.
So the sword ceased from Israel: and Jonathan dwelt in Machmas,
and Jonathan began there to judge the people, and he destroyed the
wicked out of Israel.
make Jonathan their friend. Alexander kills Demetrius in battle, and
honours Jonathan. His victory over Apollonius.
Now in the hundred and sixtieth year, Alexander, the son of
they received him, and he reigned there.
And king Demetrius heard of it, and gathered together an exceeding
great army, and went forth against him to fight.
And Demetrius sent a letter to Jonathan, with peaceable words, to
magnify him.
For he said: Let us first make a peace with him, before he make
one with Alexander against us.
For he will remember all the evils that we have done against him,
and against his brother, and against his nation.
And he gave him authority to gather together a army, and to make
arms, and that he should be his confederate: and the hostages that were
in the castle, he commanded to be delivered to him.
And Jonathan came to Jerusalem, and read the letters in the
hearing of all the people, and of them that were in the castle.
And they were struck with great fear, because they heard that the
king had given him authority to gather together an army.
And the hostages were delivered to Jonathan, and he restored them
to their parents.
And Jonathan dwelt in Jerusalem, and began to build, and to
repair the city.
And he ordered workmen to build the walls, and mount Sion round
about with square stones for fortification: and so they did.
Then the strangers that were in the strong holds, which Bacchides
had built, fled away.
And every man left his place, and departed into his own country:
Only in Bethsura there remained some of them, that had forsaken
the law, and the commandments of God: for this was a place of refuge for
them.
And king Alexander heard of the promises that Demetrius had made
and his brethren had done, and the labours that they had endured.
And he said: Shall we find such another man?  now, therefore, we
will make him our friend and our confederate.
So he wrote a letter, and sent it to him according to these
words, saying:
King Alexander to his brother, Jonathan, greetings.
We have heard of thee, that thou art a man of great power, and
fit to be our friend:
Now therefore, we make thee this day high priest of thy nation,
and that thou be called the king's friend, (and he sent him a purple
robe, and a crown of gold) and that thou be of one mind with us in our
affairs, and keep friendship with us.
Then Jonathan put on the holy vestment in the seventh month, in
the year one hundred and threescore, at the feast day of the
tabernacles: and he gathered together an army, and made a great number
of arms.
And Demetrius heard these words, and was exceeding sorry, and
said:
What is this that we have done, that Alexander hath prevented us
to gain the friendship of the Jews to strengthen himself?
I also will write to them words of request, and offer dignities,
and gifts: that they may be with me to aid me.
And he wrote to them in these words: King Demetrius to the nation
of the Jews, greeting.
Whereas you have kept covenant with us, and have continued in our
friendship, and have not joined with our enemies, we have heard of it,
and are glad.
Wherefore now continue still to keep fidelity towards us, and we
will reward you with good things, for what you have done in our behalf.
And we will remit to you many charges, and will give you gifts.
And now I free you, and all the Jews, from tributes, and I
release you from the customs of salt, and remit the crowns, and the
thirds of the seed:
And the half of the fruit of trees, which is my share, I leave to
you from this day forward, so that it shall not be taken of the land of
And let Jerusalem be holy and free, with the borders thereof: and
let the tenths, and tributes be for itself.
I yield up also the power of the castle that is in Jerusalem, and
choose, to keep it.
And every soul of the Jews that hath been carried captive from
the land of Juda in all my kingdom, I set at liberty freely, that all be
discharged from tributes, even of their cattle.
And I will that all the feasts, and the sabbaths, and the new
moons, and the days appointed, and three days before the solemn day, and
three days after the solemn day, be all days of immunity and freedom,
for all the Jews that are in my kingdom:
And no man shall have power to do any thing against them, or to
molest any of them, in any cause.
And let there be enrolled in the king's army to the number of
thirty thousand of the Jews: and allowance shall be made them, as is due
to all the king's forces and certain of them shall be appointed to be in
the fortresses of the great king:
And some of them shall be set over the affairs of the kingdom,
that are of trust, and let the governors be taken from among themselves,
and let them walk in their own laws, as the king hath commanded in the
land of Juda.
And the three cities that are added to Judea, out of the country
of Samaria, let them be accounted with Judea: that they may be under
one, and obey no other authority but that of the high priest:
Ptolemais and the confines thereof, I give as a free gift to the
holy places that are in Jerusalem, for the necessary charges of the holy
things.
And I give every year fifteen thousand sickles of silver out of
the king's accounts, of what belongs to me:
And all that is above, which they that were over the affairs the
years before, had not paid, from this time they shall give it to the
works of the house.
Moreover, the five thousand sickles of silver, which they
received from the account of the holy places, every year, shall also
belong to the priests that execute the ministry.
And whosoever shall flee into the temple that is in Jerusalem,
and in all the borders thereof, being indebted to the king for any
matter, let them be set at liberty, and all that they have in my
kingdom, let them have it free.
For the building also, or repairing the works of the holy places,
the charges shall be given out of the king's revenues:
For the building also of the walls of Jerusalem, and the
fortifying thereof round about, the charges shall be given out of the
king's account, as also for the building of the walls in Judea.
Now when Jonathan and the people heard these words, they gave no
credit to them, nor received them because they remembered the great evil
that he had done in Israel, for he had afflicted them exceedingly.
And their inclinations were towards Alexander, because he had
been the chief promoter of peace in their regard, and him they always
helped.
And king Alexander gathered together a great army, and moved his
camp near to Demetrius.
And the two kings joined battle, and the army of Demetrius fled
away, and Alexander pursued after him, and pressed them close.
And the battle was hard fought, till the sun went down: and
And Alexander sent ambassadors to Ptolemee king of Egypt, with
words to this effect, saying:
Forasmuch as I am returned into my kingdom and am set in the
throne of my ancestors, and have gotten the dominion, and have
overthrown Demetrius and possessed our country,
And have joined battle with him, and both he and his army have
been destroyed by us, and we are placed in the throne of his kingdom:
Now, therefore, let us make friendship one with another: and give
me now thy daughter to wife, and I will be thy son-in-law, and I will
give both thee and her gifts worthy of thee.
And king Ptolomee answered, saying: Happy is the day wherein thou
didst return to the land of thy fathers, and sattest in the throne of
their kingdom.
And now I will do to thee as thou hast written but meet me at
thou hast said.
So Ptolemee went out of Egypt, with Cleopatra his daughter, and
he came to Ptolemais, in the hundred and sixty-second year.
And king Alexander met him, and he gave him his daughter,
after the manner of kings.
And king Alexander wrote to Jonathan, that he should come and
meet him.
And he went honourably to Ptolemais, and he met there the two
kings, and he gave them much silver, and gold, and presents: and he
found favour in their sight.
And some pestilent men of Israel, men of a wicked life, assembled
themselves against him, to accuse him: and the king gave no heed to
them.
And he commanded that Jonathan's garments should be taken off,
and that he should be clothed with purple: and they did so. And the king
made him sit by himself.
And he said to his princes: Go out with him into the midst of the
city, and make proclamation, that no man complain against him of any
matter, and that no man trouble him for any manner of cause.
So when his accusers saw his glory proclaimed, and him clothed
with purple, they all fled away.
And the king magnified him, and enrolled him amongst his chief
friends, and made him governor, and partaker of his dominion.
And Jonathan returned into Jerusalem with peace and joy.
In the year one hundred and sixty-five, Demetrius, the son of
And king Alexander heard of it, and was much troubled, and
returned to Antioch.
And king Demetrius made Apollonius his general, who was governor
of Celesyria: and he gathered together a great army, and came to Jamnia:
and he sent to Jonathan, the high priest,
Saying: Thou alone standest against us, and I am laughed at and
reproached, because thou shewest thy power against us in the mountains.
Now, therefore, if thou trustest in thy forces, come down to us
into the plain, and there let us try one another: for with me is the
strength of war.
Ask, and learn who I am, and the rest that help me, who also say
that your foot cannot stand before our face, for thy fathers have twice
been put to flight in their own land:
And now how wilt thou be able to abide the horsemen, and so great
an army in the plain, where there is no stone, nor rock, nor place to
flee to?
Now when Jonathan heard the words of Apollonius, he was moved in
his mind: and he chose ten thousand men, and went out of Jerusalem, and
And they pitched their tents near Joppe, but they shut him out of
the city: because a garrison of Apollonius was in Joppe, and he laid
siege to it.
And they that were in the city being affrighted, opened the gates
to him: so Jonathan took Joppe.
And Apollonius heard of it, and he took three thousand horsemen,
and a great army.
And he went to Azotus, as one that was making a journey, and
immediately he went forth into the plain: because he had a great number
of horsemen, and he trusted in them. And Jonathan followed after him to
And Apollonius left privately in the camp a thousand horsemen
behind them.
And Jonathan knew that there was an ambush behind him, and they
surrounded his army, and cast darts at the people from morning till
evening.
But the people stood still, as Jonathan had commanded them: and
so their horses were fatigued.
Then Simon drew forth his army, and attacked the legion: for the
horsemen were wearied: and they were discomfited by him, and fled.
And they that were scattered about the plain fled into Azotus,
and went into Bethdagon, their idol's temple, there to save themselves.
But Jonathan set fire to Azotus, and the cities that were round
about it, and took the spoils of them and the temple of Dagon: and all
them that were fled into it, he burnt with fire.
So they that were slain by the sword, with them that were burnt,
were almost eight thousand men.
And Jonathan, removed his army from thence and camped against
And Jonathan returned into Jerusalem with his people, having many
spoils.
And it came to pass, when Alexander, the king heard these words,
that he honoured Jonathan yet more.
And he sent him a buckle of gold, as the custom is, to be given
to such as are of the royal blood. And he gave him Accaron, and all the
borders thereof, in possession.
former dies soon after. Demetrius honours Jonathan, and is rescued by
the Jews from his own subjects in Antioch. Antiochus the younger favours
And the king of Egypt gathered together an army, like the sand
that lieth upon the sea shore, and many ships: and he sought to get the
kingdom of Alexander by deceit, and join it to his own kingdom.
And he went out into Syria with peaceable words and they opened to
him the cities, and met him: for king Alexander had ordered them to go
forth to meet him, because he was his father-in-law.
Now when Ptolemee entered into the cities, he put garrisons of
soldiers in every city.
And when he came near to Azotns, they shewed him the temple of
that were destroyed, and the bodies that were cast abroad, and the
graves of them that were slain in the battle, which they had made near
the way.
And they told the king that Jonathan had done these things, to
make him odious: but the king held his peace.
And Jonathan came to meet the king at Joppe with glory, and they
saluted one another, and they lodged there.
And Jonathan went with the king as far as the river, called
And king Ptolemee got the dominion of the cities by the sea side,
even to Seleucia, and he devised evil designs against Alexander.
And he sent ambassadors to Demetrius, saying: Come, let us make a
league between us, and I will give thee my daughter whom Alexander hath,
and thou shalt reign in the kingdom of thy father.
For I repent that I have given him my daughter: for he hath
sought to kill me.
And he slandered him, because he coveted his kingdom,
And he took away his daughter, and gave her to Demetrius, and
alienated himself from Alexander, and his enmities were made manifest.
And Ptolemee entered into Antioch, and set two crowns upon his
head, that of Egypt, and that of Asia.
Now king Alexander was in Cilicia at that time: because they that
were in those places had rebelled.
And when Alexander heard of it, he came to give him battle: and
king Ptolemee brought forth his army, and met him with a strong power,
and put him to flight.
And Alexander fled into Arabia, there to be protected: and king
And Zabdiel the Arabian took off Alexander's head, and sent it to
And king Ptolemee died the third day after: and they that were in
the strong holds were destroyed by them that were within the camp.
And Demetrius reigned in the hundred and sixty-seventh year.
In those days Jonathan gathered together them that were in Judea,
to take the castle that was in Jerusalem: and they made many engines of
war against it.
Then some wicked men that hated their own nation, went away to
king Demetrius, and told him that Jonathan was besieging the castle.
And when he heard it, he was angry: and forthwith he came to
but should come to him in haste, and speak to him.
But when Jonathan heard this, he bade them besiege it still: and
he chose some of the ancients of Israel, and of the priests, and put
himself in danger.
And he took gold, and silver, and raiment, and many other
presents, and went to the king to Ptolemais and he found favour in his
sight.
And certain wicked men of his nation made complaints against him.
And the king treated him as his predecessors had done before: and
he exalted him in the sight of all his friends.
And he confirmed him in the high priesthood and all the honours
he had before, and he made him the chief of his friends.
And Jonathan requested of the king that he would make Judea free
from tribute, and the three governments, and Samaria, and the confines
thereof: and he promised him three hundred talents.
And the king consented: and he wrote letters to Jonathan of all
these things, to this effect.
King Demetrius to his brother, Jonathan, and to the nation of the
We send you here a copy of the letter which we have written to
King Demetrius to Lasthenes, his parent, greetings.
We have determined to do good to the nation of the Jews, who are
our friends, and keep the things that are just with us, for their good
will which they bear towards us.
We have ratified, therefore, unto them all the borders of Judea,
and the three cities, Apherema, Lydda, and Ramatha, which are added to
them that sacrifice in Jerusalem, instead of the payments which the king
received of them every year, and for the fruits of the land, and of the
trees.
And as for other things that belonged to us of the tithes, and of
the tributes, from this time we discharge them of them: the saltpans
also, and the crowns that were presented to us.
We give all to them, and nothing hereof shall be revoked from
this time forth and for ever.
Now, therefore, see that thou make a copy of these things, and
let it be given to Jonathan, and set upon the holy mountain, in a
conspicuous place.
And king Demetrius, seeing that the land was quiet before him,
and nothing resisted him, sent away all his forces, every man to his own
place, except the foreign army, which he had drawn together from the
islands of the nations: so all the troops of his fathers hated him.
Now there was one Tryphon who had been of Alexander's party
before: who seeing that all the army murmured against Demetrius, went to
And he pressed him much to deliver him to him, that he might be
king in his father's place: and he told him all that Demetrius had done,
and how his soldiers hated him. And he remained there many days.
And Jonathan sent to king Demetrius, desiring that he would cast
out them that were in the castle in Jerusalem, and those that were in
the strong holds: because they fought against Israel.
And Demetrius sent to Jonathan, saying: I will not only do this
for thee, and for thy people, but I will greatly honour thee, and thy
nation, when opportunity shall serve.
Now, therefore, thou shalt do well if thou send me men to help
me: for all my army is gone from me.
And Jonathan sent him three thousand valiant men to Antioch: and
they came to the king, and the king was very glad of their coming.
And they that were of the city assembled themselves together, to
the number of a hundred and twenty thousand men, and would have killed
the king.
And the king fled into the palace: and they of the city kept the
passages of the city, and began to fight.
And the king called the Jews to his assistance: and they came to
him all at once, and they all dispersed themselves through the city.
And they slew in that day a hundred thousand men, and they set
fire to the city, and got many spoils that day, and delivered the king.
And they that were of the city saw that the Jews had got the city
as they would: and they were discouraged in their mind, and cried to the
king, making supplication, and saying:
Grant us peace, and let the Jews cease from assaulting us, and the
city.
And they threw down their arms, and made peace, and the Jews were
glorified in the sight of the king, and in the sight of all that were in
his realm, and were renowned throughout the kingdom, and returned to
So king Demetrius sat in the throne of his kingdom: and the land
was quiet before him.
And he falsified all whatsoever he had said, and alienated
himself from Jonathan, and did not reward him according to the benefits
he had received from him, but gave him great trouble.
And after this Tryphon returned, and with him Antiochus, the
young boy, who was made king, and put on the diadem.
And there assembled unto him all the hands which Demetrius had
sent away, and they fought against Demetrius who turned his back and
fled.
And Tryphon took the elephants, and made himself master of
And young Antiochus wrote to Jonathan, saying: I confirm thee
in the high priesthood, and I appoint thee ruler over the four cities,
and to be one of the king's friends.
And he sent him vessels of gold for his service, and he gave him
leave to drink in gold, and to be clothed in purple, and to wear a
golden buckle:
And he made his brother, Simon, governor, from the borders of
Then Jonathan went forth, and passed through the cities beyond
the river, and all the forces of Syria gathered themselves to him to
help him, and he came to Ascalon, and they met him honourably out of the
city.
And he went from thence to Gaza: and they that were in Gaza shut
him out: and he besieged it, and burnt all the suburbs round about, and
took the spoils.
And the men of Gaza made supplication to Jonathan, and he gave
them the right hand: and he took their sons for hostages, and sent them
to Jerusalem: and he went through the country, as far as Damascus.
And Jonathan heard that the generals of Demetrius were come
treacherously to Cades, which is in Galilee, with a great army,
purposing to remove him from the affairs of the kingdom.
And he went against them: but left his brother, Simon, in the
country.
And Simon encamped against Bethsura, and assaulted it many days,
and shut them up.
And they desired him to make peace, and he granted it them: and
he cast them out from thence, and took the city, and placed a garrison
in it.
And Jonathan and his army encamped by the water of Genesar, and
before it was light they were ready in the plain of Asor.
And behold the army of the strangers met him in the plain, and
they laid an ambush for him in the mountains: but he went out against
them.
And they that lay in ambush rose out of their places, and joined
battle.
And all that were on Jonathan's side fled, and none was left of
them, but Mathathias, the son of Absalom, and Judas, the son of Calphi,
chief captain of the army.
And Jonathan rent his garments, and cast earth upon his head, and
prayed.
And Jonathan turned again to them to battle, and he put them to
flight, and they fought.
And they of his part that fled saw this, and they turned again to
him, and they all with him pursued the enemies, even to Cades, to their
own camp, and they came even thither.
And there fell of the aliens in that day three thousand men: and
of Demetrius flee away from him. He is deceived and made prisoner by
And Jonathan saw that the time served him, and he chose certain
men, and sent them to Rome, to confirm and to renew the amity with them:
And he sent letters to the Spartans, and to other places,
according to the same form.
And they went to Rome, and entered into the senate house, and
said: Jonathan, the high priest, and the nation of the Jews, have sent
us to renew the amity, and alliance, as it was before.
And they gave them letters to their governors in every place, to
conduct them into the land of Juda with peace.
And this is a copy of the letters which Jonathan wrote to the
Jonathan, the high priest, and the ancients of the nation, and the
priests, and the rest of the people of the Jews, to the Spartans, their
brethren, greeting.
There were letters sent long ago to Onias the high priest, from
as the copy here underwritten doth specify.
And Onias received the ambassador with honour and received the
letters, wherein there was mention made of the alliance, and amity.
We, though we needed none of these things having for our comfort
the holy books that are in our hands,
Chose rather to send to you to renew the brotherhood and
friendship, lest we should become stranger to you altogether: for there
is a long time passed since you sent to us.
We, therefore, at all times without ceasing, both in our
festivals, and other days wherein it is convenient, remember you in the
sacrifices that we offer, and in our observances, as it is meet and
becoming to remember brethren.
And we rejoice at your glory.
But we have had many troubles and wars on every side; and the
kings that are round about us have fought against us.
But we would not be troublesome to you, nor to the rest of our
allies and friends, in these wars.
For we have had help from heaven, and we have been delivered, and
our enemies are humbled.
We have chosen, therefore, Numenius the son of Antiochus, and
with them the former amity and alliance.
And we have commanded them to go also to you, and salute you, and
to deliver you our letters, concerning the renewing of our brotherhood.
And now you shall do well to give us an answer hereto.
And this is the copy of the letter which he had sent to Onias:
Arius, king of the Spartans, to Onias, the high priest, greeting.
It is found in writing concerning the Spartans, and the Jews,
that they are brethren, and that they are of the stock of Abraham.
And now since this is come to our knowledge, you do well to write
to us of your prosperity.
And we also have written back to you, That our cattle, and our
possessions, are yours: and yours, ours. We, therefore, have commanded
that these things should be told you.
Now Jonathan heard that the generals of Demetrius were come again
with a greater army than before to fight against him.
So he went out from Jerusalem, and met them in the land of Amath:
for he gave them no time to enter into his country.
And he sent spies into their camp, and they came back, and
brought him word that they designed to come upon them in the night.
And when the sun was set, Jonathan commanded his men to watch,
and to be in arms all night long ready to fight, and he set sentinels
round about the camp.
And the enemies heard that Jonathan and his men were ready for
battle: and they were struck with fear and dread in their heart: and
they kindled fires in their camp.
But Jonathan, and they that were with him, knew it not till the
morning: for they saw the lights burning.
And Jonathan pursued after them, but overtook them not: for they
had passed the river Eleutherus.
And Jonathan turned upon the Arabians, that are called Zabadeans:
and he defeated them, and took the spoils of them.
And he went forward, and came to Damascus, and passed through all
that country.
Simon also went forth, and came as far as Ascalon, and the
neighbouring fortresses, and he turned aside to Joppe, and took
possession of it,
(For he heard that they designed to deliver the hold to them that
took part with Demetrius) and he put a garrison there to keep it.
And Jonathan came back, and called together the ancients of the
people; and he took a resolution with them to build fortresses in Judea,
And to build up walls in Jerusalem, and raise a mount between the
castle and the city, to separate it from the city, that so it might have
no communication, and that they might neither buy nor sell.
And they came together to build up the city: for the wall that
was upon the brook, towards the east, was broken down, and he repaired
that which is called Caphetetha:
And Simon built Adiada in Sephela, and fortified it, and set up
gates and bars.
Now when Tryphon had conceived a design to make himself king of
Fearing lest Jonathan would not suffer him, but would fight
against him: he sought to seize upon him, and to kill him. So he rose up
and came to Bethsan.
And Jonathan went out to meet him with forty thousand men chosen
for battle, and came to Bethsan.
Now when Tryphon saw that Jonathan came with a great army, he
durst not stretch forth his hand against him.
But received him with honour, and commended him to all his
friends, and gave him presents: and he commanded his troops to obey him,
as himself.
And he said to Jonathan: Why hast thou troubled all the people,
whereas we have no war?
Now, therefore, send them back to their own houses: and choose
thee a few men that may be with thee, and come with me to Ptolemais, and
army, and all that have any charge, and I will return and go away: for
this is the cause of my coming.
And Jonathan believed him, and did as he said: and sent away his
army, and they departed into the land of Juda:
But he kept with him three thousand men: of whom he sent two
thousand into Galilee, and one thousand went with him.
Now as soon as Jonathan entered into Ptolemais, they of Ptolemais
shut the gates of the city, and took him: and all them that came in with
him they slew with the sword.
Then Tryphon sent an army and horsemen into Galilee, and into the
great plain, to destroy all Jonathan's company.
But they, when they understood that Jonathan, and all that were
with him, were taken and slain, encouraged one another, and went out
ready for battle.
Then they that had come after them, seeing that they stood for
their lives, returned back.
Whereupon they all came peaceably into the land of Juda and they
bewailed Jonathan, and them that had been with him, exceedingly: and
Then all the heathens that were round about them, sought to
destroy them. For they said:
They have no prince, nor any to help them: now therefore, let us
make war upon them, and take away the memory of them from amongst men.
slain by Tryphon. Simon is favoured by Demetrius: he taketh Gaza, and
the castle of Jerusalem.
Now Simon heard that Tryphon was gathering together a very great
army to invade the land of Juda, and to destroy it.
And seeing that the people was in dread and in fear, he went up to
And exhorted them, saying: You know what great battles I and my
brethren, and the house of my father, have fought for the laws, and the
sanctuary, and the distresses that we have seen:
By reason whereof all my brethren have lost their lives for
And now far be it from me to spare my life in any time of trouble:
for I am not better than my brethren.
I will avenge then my nation and the sanctuary, and our children,
and wives: for all the heathens are gathered together to destroy us out
of mere malice.
And the spirit of the people was enkindled as soon as they heard
these words:
And they answered with a loud voice, saying: Thou art our leader
in the place of Judas, and Jonathan, thy brother:
Fight thou our battles, and we will do whatsoever thou shalt say
to us.
So gathering together all the men of war, he made haste to finish
all the walls of Jerusalem, and he fortified it round about.
And he sent Jonathan, the son of Absalom, and with him a new
army, into Joppe, and he cast out them that were in it, and himself
remained there.
And Tryphon removed from Ptolemais with a great army, to invade
the land of Juda, and Jonathan was with him in custody.
But Simon pitched in Addus, over against the plain.
And when Tryphon understood that Simon was risen up in the place
of his brother, Jonathan, and that he meant to join battle with him, he
sent messengers to him,
Saying: We have detained thy brother, Jonathan, for the money
that he owed in the king's account, by reason of the affairs which he
had the management of.
But now send a hundred talents of silver, and his two sons for
hostages, that when he is set at liberty he may not revolt from us, and
we will release him.
Now Simon knew that he spoke deceitfully to him; nevertheless, he
ordered the money and the children to be sent, lest he should bring upon
himself a great hatred of the people of Israel, who might have said:
Because he sent not the money and the children therefore is he
lost.
So he sent the children and the hundred talents and he lied, and
did not let Jonathan go.
And after this, Tryphon entered within the country, to destroy
it: and they went about by the way that leadeth to Ador: and Simon and
his army marched to every place whithersoever they went.
them.
And they that were in the castle, sent messengers to Tryphon,
that he should make haste to come through the desert, and send them
victuals.
And Tryphon made ready all his horsemen to come that night; but
there fell a very great snow, and he came not into the country of
And when he approached to Bascama, he slew Jonathan and his sons
there.
And Tryphon returned, and went into his own country.
And Simon sent, and took the bones of Jonathan, his brother, and
buried them in Modin, the city of his fathers.
And all Israel bewailed him with great lamentation: and they
mourned for him many days.
And Simon built over the sepulchre of his father and of his
brethren, a building lofty to the sight, of polished stone, behind and
before:
And he set up seven pyramids, one against another, for his
father, and his mother, and his four brethren:
And round about these he set great pillars; and upon the pillars,
arms, for a perpetual memory; and by the arms, ships carved, which might
be seen by all that sailed on the sea.
This is the sepulchre that he made in Modin, even unto this day.
But Tryphon, when he was upon a journey with the young king,
And he reigned in his place, and put on the crown of Asia: and
brought great evils upon the land.
And Simon built up the strong holds of Judea, fortifying them
with high towers, and great walls, and gates and bars: and he stored up
victuals in the fortresses.
And Simon chose men, and sent to king Demetrius, to the end that
he should grant an immunity to the land; for all that Tryphon did, was
to spoil.
And king Demetrius, in answer to this request, wrote a letter in
this manner:
King Demetrius to Simon, the high priest, and friend of kings,
and to the ancients, and to the nation of the Jews, greeting:
The golden crown, and the palm, which you sent, we have received:
and we are ready to make a firm peace with you, and to write to the
king's chief officers to release you the things that we have released.
For all that we have decreed in your favour shall stand in force.
And as for any oversight or fault committed unto this day, we
forgive it: and the crown which you owed: and if any other thing were
taxed in Jerusalem, now let it not be taxed.
And if any of you be fit to be enrolled among ours, let them be
enrolled, and let there be peace between us.
In the year one hundred and seventy, the yoke of the Gentiles was
taken off from Israel.
And the people of Israel began to write in the instruments, and
public records, The first year under Simon, the high priest, the great
captain, and prince of the Jews.
In those days Simon besieged Gaza, and camped round about it, and
he made engines, and set them to the city, and he struck one tower, and
took it.
And they that were within the engine leapt into the city: and
there was a great uproar in the city.
And they that were in the city went up, with their wives and
children, upon the wall, with their garments rent, and they cried with a
loud voice, beseeching Simon to grant them peace.
And they said: Deal not with us according to our evil deeds, but
according to thy mercy.
And Simon being moved, did not destroy them but yet he cast them
out of the city, and cleansed the houses wherein there had been idols,
and then he entered into it with hymns, blessing the Lord:
And having cast out of it all uncleanness, he placed in it men
that should observe the law: and he fortified it, and made it his
habitation.
But they that were in the castle of Jerusalem were hindered from
going out and coming into the country, and from buying and selling: and
they were straitened with hunger, and many of them perished through
famine.
And they cried to Simon for peace, and he granted it to them: and
he cast them out from thence and cleansed the castle from uncleannesses.
And they entered into it the three and twentieth day of the
second month, in the year one hundred and seventy-one, with
thanksgiving, and branches of palm trees, and harps, and cymbals, and
psalteries, and hymns, and canticles, because the great enemy was
destroyed out of Israel.
And he ordained that these days should be kept every year with
gladness.
And he fortified the mountain of the temple that was near the
castle, and he dwelt there himself, and they that were with him.
And Simon saw that John, his son, was a valiant man for war: and
he made him captain of all the forces: and he dwelt in Gazara.
government of Simon.
In the year one hundred and seventy-two king Demetrius assembled
his army, and went into Media to get him succours to fight against
And Arsaces, the king of Persia and Media, heard that Demetrius
was entered within his borders, and he sent one of his princes to take
him alive, and bring him to him.
And he went, and defeated the army of Demetrius: and took him, and
brought him to Arsaces, and he put him into custody.
And all the land of Juda was at rest all the days of Simon, and he
sought the good of his nation: and his power, and his glory pleased them
well all his days.
And with all his glory he took Joppe for a haven, and made an
entrance to the isles of the sea.
And he enlarged the bounds of his nation, and made himself master
of the country.
And he gathered together a great number of captives, and had the
dominion of Gazara, and of Bethsura, and of the castle: and took away
all uncleanness out of it, and there was none that resisted him.
And every man tilled his land with peace, and the land of Juda
yielded her increase, and the trees of the fields their fruit.
The ancient men sat all in the streets, and treated together of
the good things of the land, and the young men put on them glory, and
the robes of war.
And he provided victuals for the cities, and he appointed that
they should be furnished with ammunition, so that the fame of his glory
was renowned even to the end of the earth.
He made peace in the land, and Israel rejoiced with great joy.
And every man sat under his vine, and under his fig tree: and
there was none to make them afraid.
There was none left in the land to fight against them: kings were
discomfited in those days.
And he strengthened all those of his people that were brought
low, and he sought the law, and took away every unjust and wicked man.
He glorified the sanctuary, and multiplied the vessels of the
holy places.
And it was heard at Rome, and as far as Sparta, that Jonathan was
dead: and they were very sorry.
But when they heard that Simon, his brother, was made high priest
in his place, and was possessed of all the country, and the cities
therein:
They wrote to him in tables of brass, to renew the friendship and
alliance which they had made with Judas and with Jonathan, his brethren.
And they were read before the assembly in Jerusalem. And this is
the copy of the letters that the Spartans sent.
The princes and the cities of the Spartans, to Simon, the high
priest, and to the ancients, and the priests, and the rest of the people
of the Jews, their brethren, greeting.
The ambassadors that were sent to our people, have told us of
your glory, and honour, and joy: and we rejoiced at their coming.
And we registered what was said by them in the councils of the
people, in this manner: Numenius, the son of Antiochus, and Antipater,
the son of Jason, ambassadors of the Jews, came to us to renew the
former friendship with us.
And it pleased the people to receive the men honourably, and to
put a copy of their words in the public records, to be a memorial to the
people of the Spartans. And we have written a copy of them to Simon, the
high priest.
And after this Simon sent Numenius to Rome, with a great shield
of gold, of the weight of a thousand pounds, to confirm the league with
them. And when the people of Rome had heard
These words, they said: What thanks shall we give to Simon, and
his sons:
For he hath restored his brethren, and hath driven away in fight
the enemies of Israel from them: and they decreed him liberty, and
registered it in tables of brass, and set it upon pillars in mount Sion.
And this is a copy of the writing. The eighteenth day of the
month Elul, in the year one hundred and seventy-two, being the third
year under Simon, the high priest, at Asaramel,
In a great assembly of the priests, and of the people, and the
princes of the nation, and the ancients of the country, these things
were notified: Forasmuch as there have often been wars in our country,
And Simon, the son of Mathathias, of the children of Jarib, and
his brethren, have put themselves in danger, and resisted the enemies of
their nation, for the maintenance of their holy places, and the law: and
have raised their nation to great glory.
And Jonathan gathered together his nation, and was made their
high priest, and he was laid to his people.
And their enemies desired to tread down and destroy their
country, and to stretch forth their hands against their holy places.
Then Simon resisted and fought for his nation, and laid out much
of his money, and armed the valiant men of his nation, and gave them
wages.
And he fortified the cities of Judea and Bethsura that lieth in
the borders of Judea, where the armour of the enemies was before: and he
placed there a garrison of Jews.
And he fortified Joppe, which lieth by the sea: and Gazara, which
bordereth upon Azotus, wherein the enemies dwelt before, and he placed
reparation.
And the people seeing the acts of Simon, and to what glory he
meant to bring his nation, made him their prince and high priest,
because he had done all these things, and for the justice and faith
which he kept to his nation, and for that he sought by all means to
advance his people.
And in his days things prospered in his hands, so that the
heathens were taken away out of their country, and they also that were
in the city of David, in Jerusalem, in the castle, out of which they
issued forth, and profaned all places round about the sanctuary, and did
much evil to purity.
And he placed therein Jews for the defence of the country, and of
the city, and he raised up the walls of Jerusalem.
And king Demetrius confirmed him in the high priesthood.
According to these things he made him his friend, and glorified
him with great glory.
For he had heard that the Romans had called the Jews their
friends, and confederates, and brethren, and that they had received
And that the Jews, and their priests, had consented that he
should be their prince and high priest for ever, till there should arise
a faithful prophet:
And that he should be chief over them, and that he should have
the charge of the sanctuary, and that he should appoint rulers over
their works, and over the country, and over the armour, and over the
strong holds;
And that he should have care of the holy places; and that he
should be obeyed by all, and that all the writings in the country should
be made in his name; and that he should be clothed with purple and gold:
And that it should not be lawful for any of the people, or of the
priests, to disannul any of these things, or to gainsay his words, or to
call together an assembly in the country without him: or to be clothed
with purple, or to wear a buckle of gold.
And whosoever shall do otherwise, or shall make void any of these
things, shall be punished.
And it pleased all the people to establish Simon, and to do
according to these words.
And Simon accepted thereof, and was well pleased to execute the
office of the high priesthood, and to be captain, and prince of the
nation of the Jews, and of the priests, and to be chief over all.
And they commanded that this writing should be put in tables of
brass, and that they should be set up within the compass of the
sanctuary, in a conspicuous place:
And that a copy thereof should be put in the treasury, that
nations in favour of the Jews. Antiochus quarrels with Simon, and sends
troops to annoy him.
And king Antiochus, the son of Demetrius, sent letters from the
isles of the sea to Simon, the priest, and prince of the nation of the
And the contents were these: King Antiochus to Simon, the high
priest, and to the nation of the Jews, greeting.
Forasmuch as certain pestilent men have usurped the kingdom of our
fathers, and my purpose is to challenge the kingdom, and to restore it
to its former estate; and I have chosen a great army, and have built
ships of war.
And I design to go through the country, that I may take revenge of
them that have destroyed our country, and that have made many cities
desolate in my realm.
Now, therefore, I confirm unto thee all the oblations which all
the kings before me remitted to thee, and what other gifts soever they
remitted to thee:
And I give thee leave to coin thy own money in thy country:
And let Jerusalem be holy and free, and all the armour that hath
been made, and the fortresses which thou hast built, and which thou
keepest in thy hands, let them remain to thee.
And all that is due to the king, and what should be the king's
hereafter, from this present and for ever, is forgiven thee.
And when we shall have recovered our kingdom, we will glorify
thee, and thy nation, and the temple, with great glory, so that your
glory shall be made manifest in all the earth.
In the year one hundred and seventy-four, Antiochus entered into
the land of his fathers, and all the forces assembled to him, so that
few were left with Tryphon.
And king Antiochus pursued after him, and he fled along by the
sea coast and came to Dora.
For he perceived that evils were gathered together upon him, and
his troops had forsaken him.
And Antiochus camped above Dora with a hundred and twenty
thousand men of war, and eight thousand horsemen:
And he invested the city, and the ships drew near by sea: and
they annoyed the city by land, and by sea, and suffered none to come in,
or to go out.
And Numenius, and they that had been with him, came from the city
of Rome, having letters written to the kings, and countries, the
contents whereof were these:
Lucius, the consul of the Romans, to king Ptolemee, greeting.
The ambassadors of the Jews, our friends, came to us, to renew
the former friendship and alliance, being sent from Simon, the high
priest, and the people of the Jews.
And they brought also a shield of gold of a thousand pounds.
It hath seemed good therefore to us, to write to the kings and
countries, that they should do them no harm, nor fight against them,
their cities, or countries: and that they should give no aid to them
that fight against them.
And it hath seemed good to us to receive the shield of them.
If, therefore, any pestilent men are fled out of their country to
you, deliver them to Simon, the high priest, that he may punish them
according to their law.
These same things were written to king Demetrius, and to Attalus,
and to Ariarathes, and to Arsaces,
And to all the countries: and to Lampsacus and to the Spartans,
and to Delus, and Myndus, and Sicyon, and Caria, and Samus, and
and Rhodes, and Phaselis, and Gortyna, and Gnidus, and Cyprus, and
And they wrote a copy thereof to Simon, the high priest, and to
the people of the Jews.
But king Antiochus moved his camp to Dora the second time,
assaulting it continually, and making engines: and he shut up Tryphon,
that he could not go out.
And Simon sent to him two thousand chosen men to aid him, silver
also, and gold, and abundance of furniture.
And he would not receive them, but broke all the covenant that he
had made with him before, and alienated himself from him.
And he sent to him Athenobius, one of his friends, to treat with
him, saying: You hold Joppe and Gazara, and the castle that is in
Their borders you have wasted, and you have made great havoc in
the land, and have got the dominion of many places in my kingdom.
Now, therefore, deliver up the cities that you have taken, and
the tributes of the places whereof you have gotten the dominion without
the borders of Judea.
But if not, give me for them five hundred talents of silver, and
for the havoc that you have made, and the tributes of the cities, other
five hundred talents: or else we will come and fight against you.
So Athenobius, the king's friend came to Jerusalem, and saw the
glory of Simon and his magnificence in gold, and silver, and his great
equipage, and he was astonished, and told him the king's words.
And Simon answered him, and said to him: We have neither taken
other men's land, neither do we hold that which is other men's, but the
inheritance of our fathers, which was for some time unjustly possessed
by our enemies.
But we having opportunity, claim the inheritance of our fathers.
And as to thy complaints concerning Joppe and Gazara, they did
great harm to the people, and to our country: yet for these we will give
a hundred talents.  And Athenobius answered him not a word.
But returning in a rage to the king, made report to him of these
words, and of the glory of Simon, and of all that he had seen, and the
king was exceeding angry.
And Tryphon fled away by ship to Orthosias.
And the king appointed Cendebeus captain of the sea coast, and
gave him an army of footmen and horsemen.
And he commanded him to march with his army towards Judea: and he
commanded him to build up Gedor, and to fortify the gates of the city,
and to war against the people. But the king himself pursued after
And Cendebeus came to Jamnia, and began to provoke the people,
and to ravage Judea, and to take the people prisoners, and to kill, and
to build Gedor.
And he placed there horsemen, and an army: that they might issue
forth, and make incursions upon the ways of Judea, as the king had
commanded him.
sons are treacherously murdered by Ptolemee his son-in-law.
Then John came up from Gazara, and told Simon, his father, what
both his dignities of high priest and prince. He conquered the Edomites,
and obliged them to a conformity with the Jews in religion; and
destroyed the schismatical temple of the Samaritans.
And Simon called his two eldest sons, Judas and John, and said to
them: I and my brethren, and my father's house, have fought against the
enemies of Israel from our youth even to this day: and things have
prospered so well in our hands, that we have delivered Israel
oftentimes.
And now I am old, but be you instead of me, and my brethren, and
go out, and fight for our nation: and the help from heaven be with you.
Then he chose out of the country twenty thousand fighting men, and
horsemen, and they went forth against Cendebeus: and they rested in
And they arose in the morning, and went into the plain: and behold
a very great army of footmen and horsemen came against them, and there
was a running river between them.
And he and his people pitched their camp over against them, and he
saw that the people were afraid to go over the river, so he went over
first: then the men seeing him, passed over after him.
And he divided the people, and set the horsemen in the midst of
the footmen: but the horsemen of the enemies were very numerous.
And they sounded the holy trumpets: and Cendebeus and his army
were put to flight: and there fell many of them wounded, and the rest
fled into the strong hold.
At that time, Judas, John's brother, was wounded: but John pursued
after them, till he came to Cedron, which he had built:
fortifying.
And they fled even to the towers that were in the fields of
men, and he returned into Judea in peace.
Now Ptolemee, the son of Abobus, was appointed captain in the
plain of Jericho, and he had abundance of silver and gold.
For he was son-in-law of the high priest.
And his heart was lifted up, and he designed to make himself
master of the country, and he purposed treachery against Simon and his
sons, to destroy them.
Now Simon, as he was going through the cities that were in the
country of Judea, and taking care for the good ordering of them, went
down to Jericho, he and Mathathias and Judas, his sons, in the year one
hundred and seventy-seven, the eleventh month: the same is the month
And the son of Abobus received them deceitfully into a little
fortress, that is called Doch, which he had built: and he made them a
great feast, and hid men there.
And when Simon and his sons had drunk plentifully, Ptolemee and
his men rose up, and took their weapons, and entered into the banqueting
place, and slew him, and his two sons, and some of his servants.
And he committed a great treachery in Israel, and rendered evil
for good.
And Ptolemee wrote these things, and sent to the king that he
should send him an army to aid him, and he would deliver him the
country, and their cities, and tributes.
And he sent others to Gazara to kill John: and to the tribunes he
sent letters to come to him, and that he would give them silver, and
gold, and gifts.
And he sent others to take Jerusalem, and the mountain of the
temple.
Now one running before, told John in Gazara, that his father and
his brethren were slain, and that he hath sent men to kill thee also.
But when he heard it, he was exceedingly afraid: and he
apprehended the men that came to kill him, and he put them to death: for
he knew that they sought to make him away.
And as concerning the rest of the acts of John, and his wars, and
the worthy deeds, which he bravely achieved, and the building of the
walls, which he made, and the things that he did:
Behold, these are written in the book of the days of his
priesthood, from the time that he was made high priest after his father.
contained in the first: nor does is come down so low as the first does:
but relates many of the same facts more at large, and adds other
remarkable particulars, omitted in the first book, relating to the state
of the Jews, as well before as under the persecution of ANTIOCHUS. The
author, who is not the same with that of the first book, has given (as
we learn from chap. 2.20, etc.) a short abstract of what JASON of Cyrene
had written in the five volumes, concerning JUDAS and his brethren. He
wrote in Greek, and begins with two letters, sent by the Jews of
thanks for their delivery from Antiochus: and exhort their brethren to
keep the feast of the dedication of the altar, and of the miraculous
fire.
To the brethren, the Jews that are throughout Egypt; the brethren,
the Jews that are in Jerusalem, and in the land of Judea, send health
and good peace.
May God be gracious to you, and remember his covenant that he made
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, his faithful servants:
And give you all a heart to worship him, and to do his will with a
great heart, and a willing mind.
May he open your heart in his law, and in his commandments, and
send you peace.
May he hear your prayers, and be reconciled unto you, and never
forsake you in the evil time.
And now here we are praying for you.
When Demetrius reigned, in the year one hundred and sixty-nine, we
years, after Jason withdrew himself from the holy land, and from the
kingdom.
They burnt the gate, and shed innocent blood: then we prayed to the
lighted the lamps, and set forth the loaves.
And now celebrate ye the days of Scenopegia in the month of Casleu.
altar, called here Scenopegia, or feast of tabernacles, from being
celebrated with the like solemnity.
In the year one hundred and eighty-eight, the people that is at
preceptor of king Ptolemee, who is of the stock of the anointed priests,
and to the Jews that are in Egypt, health and welfare.
Having been delivered by God out of great dangers, we give him
great thanks, forasmuch as we have been in war with such a king.
10, is not Judas Machabeus, who was dead long before the year 188 of the
kingdom of the Greeks, for he died in the year 146 of that epoch, (see
above 1 Mac. chap. 2., ver. 70, also the note on chap. 1, ver. 2,) but
either Judas the eldest son of John Hircanus, or Judas the Essene,
renowned for the gift of prophecy, who flourished about that time.
For he made numbers of men swarm out of Persia, that have fought
against us, and the holy city.
For when the leader himself was in Persia, and with him a very
great army, he fell in the temple of Nanea, being deceived by the
counsel of the priests of Nanea.
For Antiochus, with his friends, came to the place as though he
would marry her, and that he might receive great sums of money under the
title of a dowry.
And when the priests of Nanea had set it forth, and he with a
small company had entered into the compass of the temple, they shut the
temple,
When Antiochus was come in: and opening a secret entrance of the
temple, they cast stones and slew the leader, and them that were with
him, and hewed them in pieces; and cutting off their heads, they threw
them forth.
Blessed be God in all things, who hath delivered up the wicked.
Therefore, whereas we purpose to keep the purification of the
temple on the five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu, we thought
it necessary to signify it to you: that you also may keep the day of
offered sacrifice, after the temple and the altar was built.
For when our fathers were led into Persia, the priests that then
were worshippers of God, took privately the fire from the altar, and hid
it in a valley where there was a deep pit without water, and there they
kept it safe, so that the place was unknown to all men.
the Persian empire.
But when many years had passed, and it pleased God that Nehemias
should be sent by the king of Persia, he sent some of the posterity of
those priests that had hid it, to seek for the fire: and as they told
us, they found no fire, but thick water.
Then he bade them draw it up, and bring it to him: and the priest,
with the same water, both the wood, and the things that were laid upon
it.
And when this was done, and the time came that the sun shone out,
which before was in a cloud, there was a great fire kindled, so that all
wondered.
And all the priests made prayer, while the sacrifice was
consuming, Jonathan beginning, and the rest answering.
And the prayer of Nehemias was after this manner: O Lord God,
art the good king,
Who alone art gracious, who alone art just, and almighty, and
eternal, who deliverest Israel from all evil, who didst choose the
fathers, and didst sanctify them:
Receive the sacrifice for all thy people Israel, and preserve thy
own portion, and sanctify it.
Gather together our scattered people, deliver them that are slaves
to the Gentiles, and look upon them that are despised and abhorred: that
the Gentiles may know that thou art our God.
Punish them that oppress us, and that treat us injuriously with
pride.
Establish thy people in thy holy place, as Moses hath spoken.
And the priests sung hymns till the sacrifice was consumed.
And when the sacrifice was consumed, Nehemias commanded the water
that was left to be poured out upon the great stones.
Which being done, there was kindled a flame from them: but it was
consumed by the light that shined from the altar.
And when this matter became public, it was told to the king of
the fire, there appeared water, with which Nehemias and they that were
with him had purified the sacrifices.
And the king considering, and diligently examining the matter,
made a temple for it, that he might prove what had happened.
the fire was hid, to separate it from profane uses, to the end that it
might be respected as a holy place.
And when he had proved it, he gave the priests many goods, and
divers presents, and he took and distributed them to them with his own
hand.
And Nehemias called this place Nephthar, which is interpreted
purification. But many call it Nephi.
time of the captivity. The author's preface.
Now it is found in the descriptions of Jeremias, the prophet, that
he commanded them that went into captivity, to take the fire, as it hath
been signified, and how he gave charge to them that were carried away
into captivity.
that is now lost.
And how he gave them the law, that they should not forget the
commandments of the Lord, and that they should not err in their minds,
seeing the idols of gold, and silver, and the ornaments of them.
And with other such like speeches, he exhorted them that they would
not remove the law from their heart.
It was also contained in the same writing, how the prophet, being
warned by God, commanded that the tabernacle and the ark should
accompany him, till he came forth to the mountain where Moses went up,
and saw the inheritance of God.
And when Jeremias came thither he found a hollow cave: and he
carried in thither the tabernacle, and the ark, and the altar of
incense, and so stopped the door.
Then some of them that followed him, came up to mark the place: but
they could not find it.
And when Jeremias perceived it, he blamed them, saying: The place
shall be unknown, till God gather together the congregation of the
people, and receive them to mercy.
And then the Lord will shew these things, and the majesty of the
sanctified to the great God.
For he treated wisdom in a magnificent manner: and like a wise man,
he offered the sacrifice of the dedication, and of the finishing of the
temple.
And as Moses prayed to the Lord, and fire came down from heaven,
and consumed the holocaust: so Solomon also prayed, and fire came down
from heaven and consumed the holocaust.
And Moses said: Because the sin offering was not eaten, it was
consumed.
So Solomon also celebrated the dedication eight days.
And these same things were set down in the memoirs, and
commentaries of Nehemias: and how he made a library, and gathered
together out of the countries, the books both of the prophets, and of
And in like manner Judas also gathered together all such things as
were lost by the war we had, and they are in our possession.
Wherefore, if you want these things, send some that may fetch them
to you.
As we are then about to celebrate the purification, we have
written unto you: and you shall do well, if you keep the same days.
the temple.
And we hope that God, who hath delivered his people, and hath
rendered to all the inheritance, and the kingdom, and the priesthood,
and the sanctuary,
As he promised in the law, will shortly have mercy upon us, and
will gather us together from every land under heaven into the holy
place.
For he hath delivered us out of great perils, and hath cleansed
the place.
Now as concerning Judas Machabeus, and his brethren, and the
purification of the great temple, and the dedication of the altar:
As also the wars against Antiochus, the Illustrious, and his son,
And the manifestations that came from heaven to them, that behaved
themselves manfully on the behalf of the Jews, so that, being but a few
they made themselves masters of the whole country, and put to flight the
barbarous multitude:
And recovered again the most renowned temple in all the world, and
delivered the city, and restored the laws that were abolished, the Lord
with all clemency shewing mercy to them.
And all such things as have been comprised in five books by Jason,
of Cyrene, we have attempted to abridge in one book.
For considering the multitude of books, and the difficulty that
they find that desire to undertake the narrations of histories, because
of the multitude of the matter,
We have taken care for those indeed that are willing to read, that
it might be a pleasure of mind: and for the studious, that they may more
easily commit to memory: and that all that read might receive profit.
And as to ourselves indeed, in undertaking this work of abridging,
we have taken in hand no easy task; yea, rather a business full of
watching and sweat.
does not exempt them from labour in seeking out the matter which they
are to treat of, and the order and manner in which they are to deliver
it. So St. Luke writ the gospel having diligently attained to all
things. Luke 1. ver. 3.
But as they that prepare a feast, and seek to satisfy the will of
others: for the sake of many, we willingly undergo the labour.
Leaving to the authors the exact handling of every particular, and
as for ourselves, according to the plan proposed, studying to be brief.
For as the master builder of a new house must have care of the
whole building: but he that taketh care to paint it, must seek out fit
things for the adorning of it: so must it be judged of us.
For to collect all that is to be known, to put the discourse in
order, and curiously to discuss every particular point, is the duty of
the author of a history:
But to pursue brevity of speech, and to avoid nice declarations of
things, is to be granted to him that maketh an abridgment.
Here then we will begin the narration: let this be enough by way
of a preface: for it is a foolish thing to make a long prologue, and to
be short in the story itself.
in the temple. He is struck by God, and healed by the prayers of the
high priest.
Therefore, when the holy city was inhabited with all peace, and the
laws as yet were very well kept, because of the godliness of Onias, the
high priest and the hatred his soul had of evil,
It came to pass that even the kings themselves and the princes
esteemed the place worthy of the highest honour, and glorified the
temple with very great gifts:
So that Seleucus, king of Asia, allowed out of his revenues all the
charges belonging to the ministry of the sacrifices.
But one Simon, of the tribe of Benjamin, who was appointed overseer
of the temple, strove in opposition to the high priest, to bring about
some unjust thing in the city.
And when he could not overcome Onias, he went to Apollonius, the
son of Tharseas, who at that time was governor of Celesyria, and
And told him, that the treasury in Jerusalem was full of immense
sums of money, and the common store was infinite, which did not belong
to the account of the sacrifices: and that it was possible to bring all
into the king's hands.
Now when Apollonius had given the king notice concerning the money
that he was told of, he called for Heliodorus, who had the charge over
his affairs, and sent him with commission to bring him the foresaid
money.
So Heliodorus forthwith began his journey, under a colour of
visiting the cities of Celesyria and Phenicia, but indeed to fulfil the
king's purpose.
And when he was come to Jerusalem, and had been courteously
received in the city by the high priest, he told him what information
had been given concerning the money: and declared the cause for which he
was come: and asked if these things were so indeed.
Then the high priest told him that these were sums deposited, and
provisions for the subsistence of the widows and the fatherless:
And that some part of that which wicked Simon had given
intelligence of belonged to Hircanus, son of Tobias, a man of great
dignity; and that the whole was four hundred talents of silver, and two
hundred of gold.
But that to deceive them who had trusted to the place and temple
which is honoured throughout the whole world, for the reverence and
holiness of it, was a thing which could not by any means be done.
But he, by reason of the orders he had received from the king,
said, that by all means the money must be carried to the king.
So on the day he had appointed, Heliodorus entered in to order
this matter. But there was no small terror throughout the whole city.
And the priests prostrated themselves before the altar in their
priests' vestments, and called upon him from heaven, who made the law
concerning things given to be kept, that he would preserve them safe,
for them that had deposited them.
Now whosoever saw the countenance of the high priest, was wounded
in heart: for his face, and the changing of his colour, declared the
inward sorrow of his mind.
For the man was so compassed with sadness and horror of the body,
that it was manifest to them that beheld him, what sorrow he had in his
heart.
Others also came flocking together out of their houses, praying
and making public supplication, because the place was like to come into
contempt.
And the women, girded with haircloth about their breasts, came
together in the streets. And the virgins also that were shut up, came
forth, some to Onias, and some to the walls, and others looked out of
the windows.
And all holding up their hands towards heaven made supplication.
For the expectation of the mixed multitude, and of the high
priest, who was in an agony, would have moved any one to pity.
And these indeed called upon almighty God, to preserve the things
that had been committed to them safe and sure for those that had
committed them.
But Heliodorus executed that which he had resolved on, himself
being present in the same place with his guard about the treasury.
But the spirit of the Almighty God gave a great evidence of his
presence, so that all that had presumed to obey him, falling down by the
power of God, were struck with fainting and dread.
For there appeared to them a horse, with a terrible rider upon
him, adorned with a very rich covering: and he ran fiercely and struck
armour of gold.
Moreover there appeared two other young men, beautiful and strong,
bright and glorious, and in comely apparel: who stood by him, on either
side, and scourged him without ceasing with many stripes.
And Heliodorus suddenly fell to the ground, and they took him up,
covered with great darkness, and having put him into a litter, they
carried him out.
So he that came with many servants, and all his guard, into the
aforesaid treasury, was carried out, no one being able to help him, the
manifest power of God being known.
And he indeed, by the power of God, lay speechless, and without
all hope of recovery.
But they praised the Lord, because he had glorified his place: and
the temple, that a little before was full of fear and trouble, when the
Then some of the friends of Heliodorus forthwith begged of Onias,
that he would call upon the Most High to grant him his life, who was
ready to give up the ghost.
So the high priest, considering that the king might perhaps
suspect that some mischief had been done to Heliodorus by the Jews,
offered a sacrifice of health for the recovery of the man.
And when the high priest was praying, the same young men in the
same clothing stood by Heliodorus, and said to him: Give thanks to Onias
the priest: because for his sake the Lord hath granted thee life.
And thou having been scourged by God, declare unto all men the
great works and the power of God.  And having spoken thus, they appeared
no more.
So Heliodorus, after he had offered a sacrifice to God, and made
great vows to him, that had granted him life, and given thanks to Onias,
taking his troops with him, returned to the king.
And he testified to all men the works of the great God, which he
had seen with his own eyes.
And when the king asked Heliodorus, who might be a fit man to be
sent yet once more to Jerusalem, he said:
If thou hast any enemy, or traitor to thy king dom, send him
thither, and thou shalt receive him again scourged, if so be he escape:
for there is undoubtedly in that place a certain power of God.
For he that hath his dwelling in the heavens, is the visitor and
protector of that place, and he striketh and destroyeth them that come
to do evil to it.
And the things concerning Heliodorus, and the keeping of the
treasury, fell out in this manner.
But Simon, of whom we spoke before, who was the betrayer of the
money, and of his country, spoke ill of Onias, as though he had incited
And he presumed to call him a traitor to the kingdom, who provided
for the city, and defended his nation, and was zealous for the law of
But when the enmities proceeded so far, that murders also were
committed by some of Simon's friends:
Onias, considering the danger of this contention, and that
outrageous, which increased the malice of Simon, went to the king,
Not to be an accuser of his countrymen, but with view to the common
good of all the people.
For he saw that, except the king took care, it was impossible that
matters should be settled in peace, or that Simon would cease from his
folly.
But after the death of Seleucus, when Antiochus, who was called the
And went to the king, promising him three hundred and sixty talents
of silver, and out of other revenues fourscore talents.
Besides this he promised also a hundred and fifty more, if he might
have license to set him up a place for exercise, and a place for youth,
and to entitle them that were at Jerusalem, Antiochians.
Which when the king had granted, and he had gotten the rule into
his hands, forthwith he began to bring over his countrymen to the
fashion of the heathens.
And abolishing those things, which had been decreed of special
favour by the kings in behalf of the Jews, by the means of John, the
father of that Eupolemus, who went ambassador to Rome to make amity and
alliance, he disannulled the lawful ordinances of the citizens, and
brought in fashions that were perverse.
For he had the boldness to set up, under the very castle, a place
of exercise, and to put all the choicest youths in brothel houses.
Now this was not the beginning, but an increase, and progress of
heathenish and foreign manners, through the abominable and unheard of
wickedness of Jason, that impious wretch, and no priest.
Insomuch that the priests were not now occupied about the offices
of the altar, but despising the temple and neglecting the sacrifices,
hastened to be partakers of the games, and of the unlawful allowance
thereof, and of the exercise of the discus.
And setting nought by the honours of their fathers, they esteemed
the Grecian glories for the best:
For the sake of which they incurred a dangerous contention, and
followed earnestly their ordinances, and in all things they coveted to
be like them, who were their enemies and murderers.
For acting wickedly against the laws of God doth not pass
unpunished: but this the time following will declare.
Now when the game that was used every fifth year was kept at Tyre,
the king being present,
The wicked Jason sent from Jerusalem sinful men, to carry three
hundred didrachmas of silver for the sacrifice of Hercules; but the
bearers thereof desired it might not be bestowed on the sacrifices,
because it was not necessary, but might be deputed for other charges.
So the money was appointed by him that sent it to the sacrifice of
making of galleys.
Now when Apollonius, the son of Mnestheus was sent into Egypt to
treat with the nobles of king Philometor, and Antiochus understood that
he was wholly excluded from the affairs of the kingdom, consulting his
own interest, he departed thence and came to Joppe, and from thence to
Where he was received in a magnificent manner by Jason, and the
city, and came in with torch lights, and with praises, and from thence
he returned with his army into Phenicia.
Three years afterwards Jason sent Menelaus, brother of the
aforesaid Simon, to carry money to the king, and to bring answers from
him concerning certain necessary affairs.
But he being recommended to the king, when he had magnified the
appearance of his power, got the high priesthood for himself, by
offering more than Jason by three hundred talents of silver.
So having received the king's mandate, he returned, bringing
nothing worthy of the high priesthood: but having the mind of a cruel
tyrant, and the rage of a savage beast.
Then Jason, who had undermined his own brother, being himself
undermined, was driven out a fugitive into the country of the Ammonites.
So Menelaus got the principality: but as for the money he had
promised to the king, he took no care, when Sostratus, the governor of
the castle, called for it.
For to him appertained the gathering of the taxes: wherefore they
were both called before the king.
And Menelaus was removed from the priesthood, Lysimachus, his
brother, succeeding: and Sostratus alas made governor of the Cyprians.
When these things were in doing, it fell out that they of Tharsus,
and Mallos, raised a sedition, because they were given for a gift to
The king, therefore, went in all haste to appease them, leaving
Then Menelaus supposing that he had found a convenient time,
having stolen certain vessels of gold out of the temple, gave them to
cities:
Which when Onias understood most certainly, he reproved him,
keeping himself in a safe place at Antioch, beside Daphne.
Whereupon Menelaus coming to Andronicus, desired him to kill
and (though he were suspected by him) persuaded him to come forth out of
the sanctuary, and immediately slew him, without any regard to justice.
For which cause not only the Jews, but also the other nations,
conceived indignation, and were much grieved for the unjust murder of so
great a man.
And when the king was come back from the places of Cilicia, the
of the unjust murder of Onias.
Antiochus, therefore, was grieved in his mind for Onias, and being
moved to pity, shed tears, remembering the sobriety and modesty of the
deceased.
And being inflamed to anger, he commanded Andronicus to be
stripped of his purple, and to be led about through all the city: and
that in the same place wherein he had committed the impiety against
him his deserved punishment.
Now when many sacrileges had been committed by Lysimachus in the
temple, by the counsel of Menelaus, and the rumour of it was spread
abroad, the multitude gathered themselves together against Lysimachus, a
great quantity of gold being already carried away.
Wherefore the multitude making an insurrection, and their minds
being filled with anger, Lysimachus armed about three thousand men, and
began to use violence, one Tyrannus being captain, a man far gone both
in age and in madness.
But when they perceived the attempt of Lysimachus, some caught up
stones, some strong clubs, and some threw ashes upon Lysimachus.
And many of them were wounded, and some struck down to the ground,
but all were put to flight: and as for the sacrilegious fellow himself,
they slew him beside the treasury.
Now concerning these matters, an accusation was laid against
And when the king was come to Tyre, three men were sent from the
ancients to plead the cause before him.
But Menelaus being convicted, promised Ptolemee to give him much
money to persuade the king to favour him.
So Ptolemee went to the king in a certain court where he was, as
it were to cool himself, and brought him to be of another mind:
So Menelaus, who was guilty of all the evil, was acquitted by him
of the accusations: and those poor men, who, if they had pleaded their
cause even before Scythians, should have been judged innocent, were
condemned to death.
Thus they that persecuted the cause for the city, and for the
people, and the sacred vessels, did soon suffer unjust punishment.
Wherefore even the Tyrians, being moved with indignation, were
very liberal towards their burial.
And so through the covetousness of them that were in power,
of the citizens.
At the same time Antiochus prepared for a second journey into
And it came to pass, that through the whole city of Jerusalem, for
the space of forty days, there were seen horsemen running in the air, in
gilded raiment, and armed with spears, like bands of soldiers.
And horses set in order by ranks, running one against another, with
the shakings of shields, and a multitude of men in helmets, with drawn
swords, and casting of darts, and glittering of golden armour, and of
harnesses of all sorts.
Wherefore all men prayed that these prodigies might turn to good.
Now when there was gone forth a false rumour as though Antiochus
had been dead, Jason taking with him no fewer than a thousand men,
suddenly assaulted the city: and though the citizens ran together to the
wall, the city at length was taken, and Menelaus fled into the castle.
But Jason slew his countrymen without mercy, not considering that
prosperity against one's own kindred is a very great evil, thinking they
had been enemies, and not citizens, whom he conquered.
Yet he did not get the principality, but received confusion at the
end, for the reward of his treachery, and fled again into the country of
the Ammonites.
At the last, having been shut up by Aretas, the king of the
by all men, as a forsaker of the laws and execrable, as an enemy of his
country and countrymen, he was thrust out into Egypt:
And he that had driven many out of their country perished in a
strange land, going to Lacedemon, as if for kindred sake he should have
refuge there:
But he that had cast out many unburied, was himself cast forth
both unlamented and unburied, neither having foreign burial, nor being
partaker of the sepulchre of his fathers.
Now when these things were done, the king suspected that the Jews
would forsake the alliance: whereupon departing out of Egypt with a
furious mind, he took the city by force of arms,
And commanded the soldiers to kill, and not to spare any that came
in their way, and to go up into the houses to slay.
Thus there was a slaughter of young and old, destruction of women
and children, and killing of virgins and infants.
And there were slain in the space of three whole days fourscore
thousand, forty thousand were made prisoners, and as many sold.
But this was not enough, he presumed also to enter into the
temple, the most holy in all the world Menelaus, that traitor to the
laws, and to his country, being his guide.
And taking in his wicked hands the holy vessels, which were given
by other kings and cities, for the ornament and the glory of the place,
he unworthily handled and profaned them.
Thus Antiochus going astray in mind, did not consider that God was
angry for a while, because of the sins of the inhabitants of the city:
and therefore this contempt had happened to the place:
Otherwise had they not been involved in many sins, as Heliodorus,
who was sent by king Seleucus to rob the treasury, so this man also, as
soon as he had come, had been forthwith scourged, and put back from his
presumption.
But God did not choose the people for the place's sake, but the
place for the people's sake.
And, therefore, the place also itself was made partaker of the
evils of the people: but afterwards shall communicate in the good things
thereof, and as it was forsaken in the wrath of Almighty God, shall be
exalted again with great glory, when the great Lord shall be reconciled.
So when Antiochus had taken away out of the temple a thousand and
eight hundred talents, he went back in all haste to Antioch, thinking
through pride that he might now make the land navigable, and the sea
passable on foot: such was the haughtiness of his mind.
He left also governors to afflict the people: at Jerusalem,
set him there:
And in Gazarim, Andronicus and Menelaus, who bore a more heavy
hand upon the citizens than the rest.
And whereas he was set against the Jews, he sent that hateful
prince, Apollonius, with an army of two and twenty thousand men,
commanding him to kill all that were of perfect age, and to sell the
women and the younger sort.
Who, when he was come to Jerusalem, pretending peace, rested till
the holy day of the sabbath: and then the Jews keeping holiday, he
commanded his men to take arms.
And he slew all that were come forth to flee: and running through
the city with armed men, he destroyed a very great multitude.
But Judas Machabeus, who was the tenth, had withdrawn himself into
a desert place, and there lived amongst wild beasts in the mountains
with his company: and they continued feeding on herbs, that they might
not be partakers of the pollution.
temple, and persecutes the faithful. The martyrdom of Eleazar.
But not long after the king sent a certain old man of Antioch, to
compel the Jews to depart from the laws of their fathers and of God:
And to defile the temple that was in Jerusalem, and to call it the
temple of Jupiter Olympius: and that in Garazim of Jupiter Hospitalis,
according as they were that inhabited the place.
originally strangers, the name of Hospitalis (which signifies of or
belonging to strangers) was applicable to the idol set up in their
temple.
And very bad was this invasion of evils, and grievous to all.
For the temple was full of the riot and revellings of the Gentiles:
and of men lying with lewd women.  And women thrust themselves of their
accord into the holy places, and brought in things that were not lawful.
The altar also was filled with unlawful things, which were
forbidden by the laws.
And neither were the sabbaths kept, nor the solemn days of the
fathers observed, neither did any man plainly profess himself to be a
But they were led by bitter constraint on the king's birthday to
the sacrifices: and when the feast of Bacchus was kept, they were
compelled to go about crowned with ivy in honour of Bacchus.
And there went out a decree into the neighbouring cities of the
in like manner against the Jews, to oblige them to sacrifice:
And whosoever would not conform themselves to the ways of the
For two women were accused to have circumcised their children:
whom, when they had openly led about through the city, with the infants
hanging at their breasts, they threw down headlong from the walls.
And others that had met together in caves that were near, and were
keeping the sabbath day privately, being discovered by Philip, were
burnt with fire, because they made a conscience to help themselves with
their hands, by reason of the religious observance of the day.
Now I beseech those that shall read this book, that they be not
shocked at these calamities, but that they consider the things that
happened, not as being for the destruction, but for the correction of
our nation.
For it is a token of great goodness, when sinners are not suffered
to go on in their ways for a long time, but are presently punished.
For, not as with other nations, (whom the Lord patiently
expecteth, that when the day of judgment shall come, he may punish them
in the fulness of their sins:)
Doth he also deal with us, so as to suffer our sins to come to
their height, and then take vengeance on us.
And therefore he never withdraweth his mercy from us: but though
he chastise his people with adversity he forsaketh them not.
But let this suffice in a few words for a warning to the readers.
Eleazar one of the chief of the scribes, a man advanced in years,
and of a comely countenance, was pressed to open his mouth to eat
swine's flesh.
But he, choosing rather a most glorious death than a hateful life,
went forward voluntarily to the torment.
And considering in what manner he was to come to it, patiently
bearing, he determined not to do any unlawful things for the love of
life.
But they that stood by, being moved with wicked pity, for the old
friendship they had with the man, taking him aside, desired that flesh
might be brought which it was lawful for him to eat, that he might make
as if he had eaten, as the king had commanded, of the flesh of the
sacrifice:
wicked proposal of saving his life by dissimulation.
That by so doing he might be delivered from death; and for the
sake of their old friendship with the man, they did him this courtesy.
But he began to consider the dignity of his age, and his ancient
years, and the inbred honour of his grey head, and his good life and
conversation from a child; and he answered without delay, according to
the ordinances of the holy law made by God, saying, that he would rather
be sent into the other world.
For it doth not become our age, said he, to dissemble: whereby
many young persons might think that Eleazar, at the age of fourscore and
ten years, was gone over to the life of the heathens:
And so they, through my dissimulation, and for a little time of a
corruptible life, should be deceived, and hereby I should bring a stain
and a curse upon my old age.
For though, for the present time, I should be delivered from the
punishments of men, yet should I not escape the hand of the Almighty
neither alive nor dead.
Wherefore, by departing manfully out of this life, I shall shew
myself worthy of my old age:
And I shall leave an example of fortitude to young men, if with a
ready mind and constancy I suffer an honourable death, for the most
venerable and most holy laws. And having spoken thus, he was forthwith
carried to execution.
And they that led him, and had been a little before more mild,
were changed to wrath for the words he had spoken, which they thought
were uttered out of arrogancy.
But when he was now ready to die with the stripes, he groaned: and
said: O Lord, who hast the holy knowledge, thou knowest manifestly that
whereas I might be delivered from death, I suffer grievous pains in
body: but in soul am well content to suffer these things, because I fear
thee.
Thus did this man die, leaving not only to young men, but also to
the whole nation, the memory of his death, for an example of virtue and
fortitude.
It came to pass also, that seven brethren, together with their
mother, were apprehended, and compelled by the king to eat swine's flesh
against the law, for which end they were tormented with whips and
scourges.
But one of them, who was the eldest, said thus: What wouldst thou
ask, or learn of us? we are ready to die, rather than to transgress the
laws of God, received from our fathers.
Then the king being angry, commanded fryingpans and brazen caldrons
to be made hot: which forthwith being heated,
He commanded to cut out the tongue of him that had spoken first:
and the skin of his head being drawn off, to chop off also the
extremities of his hands and feet, the rest of his brethren and his
mother looking on.
And when he was now maimed in all parts, he commanded him, being
yet alive, to be brought to the fire, and to be fried in the fryingpan:
and while he was suffering therein long torments, the rest, together
with the mother, exhorted one another to die manfully,
Saying: The Lord God will look upon the truth, and will take
pleasure in us, as Moses declared in the profession of the canticle; And
in his servants he will take pleasure.
So when the first was dead after this manner, they brought the next
to make him a mocking stock: and when they had pulled off the skin of
his head with the hair, they asked him if he would eat, before he were
punished throughout the whole body in every limb.
But he answered in his own language, and said: I will not do
it. Wherefore he also, in the next place, received the torments of the
first:
And when he was at the last gasp, he said thus: Thou indeed, O most
wicked man, destroyest us out of this present life: but the King of the
world will raise us up, who die for his laws, in the resurrection of
eternal life.
After him the third was made a mocking-stock, and when he was
required, he quickly put forth his tongue, and courageously stretched
out his hands:
And said with confidence: These I have from heaven, but for the
laws of God I now despise them, because I hope to receive them again
from him.
So that the king, and they that were with him, wondered at the
young man's courage, because he esteemed the torments as nothing.
And after he was thus dead, they tormented the fourth in the like
manner.
And when he was now ready to die, he spoke thus: It is better,
being put to death by men, to look for hope from God, to be raised up
again by him; for, as to thee, thou shalt have no resurrection unto
life.
And when they had brought the fifth, they tormented him. But he,
looking upon the king,
Said: Whereas thou hast power among men though thou art
corruptible, thou dost what thou wilt but think not that our nation is
forsaken by God.
But stay patiently a while, and thou shalt see his great power, in
what manner he will torment thee and thy seed.
After him they brought the sixth, and he being ready to die, spoke
thus: Be not deceived without cause: for we suffer these things for
ourselves, having sinned against our God, and things worthy of
admiration are done to us:
But do not think that thou shalt escape unpunished, for that thou
hast attempted to fight against God.
Now the mother was to be admired above measure, and worthy to be
remembered by good men, who beheld her seven sons slain in the space of
one day, and bore it with a good courage, for the hope that she had in
And she bravely exhorted every one of them in her own language,
being filled with wisdom; and joining a man's heart to a woman's
thought,
She said to them: I know not how you were formed in my womb; for I
neither gave you breath, nor soul, nor life, neither did I frame the
limbs of every one of you.
But the Creator of the world, that formed the nativity of man, and
that found out the origin of all, he will restore to you again, in his
mercy, both breath and life, as now you despise yourselves for the sake
of his laws.
Now Antiochus, thinking himself despised, and withal despising the
voice of the upbraider, when the youngest was yet alive, did not only
exhort him by words, but also assured him with an oath, that he would
make him a rich and a happy man, and, if he would turn from the laws of
his fathers, would take him for a friend, and furnish him with things
necessary.
But when the young man was not moved with these things, the king
called the mother, and counselled her to deal with the young man to save
his life.
And when he had exhorted her with many words she promised that she
would counsel her son.
So bending herself towards him, mocking the cruel tyrant, she said
in her own language: My son have pity upon me, that bore thee nine
months in my womb, and gave thee suck three years, and nourished thee,
and brought thee up unto this age.
I beseech thee, my son, look upon heaven and earth, and all that
is in them, and consider that God made them out of nothing, and mankind
also:
So thou shalt not fear this tormentor, but being made a worthy
partner with thy brethren, receive death, that in that mercy I may
receive thee again with thy brethren.
While she was yet speaking these words, the young man said: For
whom do you stay? I will not obey the commandment of the king, but the
commandment of the law which was given us by Moses.
But thou that hast been the author of all mischief against the
For we suffer thus for our sins.
And though the Lord, our God, is angry with us a little while, for
our chastisement and correction, yet he will be reconciled again to his
servants.
But thou, O wicked, and of all men most flagitious, be not lifted
up without cause with vain hopes, whilst thou art raging against his
servants.
For thou hast not yet escaped the judgment of the Almighty God,
who beholdeth all things.
For my brethren having now undergone a short pain, are under the
covenant of eternal life: but thou, by the judgment of God, shalt
receive just punishment for thy pride.
But I, like my brethren, offer up my life and my body for the laws
of our fathers: calling upon God to be speedily merciful to our nation,
and that thou by torments and stripes mayst confess that he alone is
But in me, and in my brethren, the wrath of the Almighty, which
hath justly been brought upon all our nation, shall cease.
Then the king being incensed with anger, raged against him more
cruelly than all the rest, taking it grievously that he was mocked.
So this man also died undefiled, wholly trusting in the Lord.
And last of all, after the sons, the mother also was consumed.
But now there is enough said of the sacrifices and of the
excessive cruelties.
But Judas Machabeus, and they that were with him, went privately
into the towns: and calling together their kinsmen and friends, and
taking unto them such as continued in the Jews' religion, they assembled
six thousand men.
And they called upon the Lord, that he would look upon his people
that was trodden down by all and would have pity on the temple, that was
defiled by the wicked:
That he would have pity also upon the city that was destroyed, that
was ready to be made even with the ground, and would hear the voice of
the blood that cried to him:
That he would remember also the most unjust deaths of innocent
children, and the blasphemies offered to his name, and would shew his
indignation on this occasion.
Now when Machabeus had gathered a multitude, he could not be
withstood by the heathens: for the wrath of the Lord was turned into
mercy.
So coming unawares upon the towns and cities, he set them on fire,
and taking possession of the most commodious places, he made no small
slaughter of the enemies:
And especially in the nights he went upon these expeditions, and
the fame of his valour was spread abroad every where.
Then Philip seeing that the man gained ground by little and little,
and that things for the most part succeeded prosperously with him, wrote
to Ptolemee, the governor of Celesyria and Phenicia, to send aid to the
king's affairs.
contend with Judas, especially after the victories he had obtained over
And he with all speed sent Nicanor, the son of Patroclus, one of
his special friends, giving him no fewer than twenty thousand armed men
of different nations, to root out the whole race of the Jews, joining
also with him Gorgias, a good soldier, and of great experience in
matters of war.
20,000 are here taken notice of, because there were no more with Nicanor
at the time of the battle.
And Nicanor purposed to raise for the king the tribute of two
thousand talents, that was to be given to the Romans, by making so much
money of the captive Jews:
Wherefore he sent immediately to the cities upon the sea coast, to
invite men together to buy up the Jewish slaves, promising that they
should have ninety slaves for one talent, not reflecting on the
vengeance which was to follow him from the Almighty.
Now when Judas found that Nicanor was coming, he imparted to the
And some of them being afraid, and distrusting the justice of God,
fled away.
Others sold all that they had left, and withal besought the Lord,
that he would deliver them from the wicked Nicanor, who had sold them
before he came near them:
And if not for their sakes, yet for the covenant that he had made
with their fathers, and for the sake of his holy and glorious name that
was invoked upon them.
But Machabeus calling together seven thousand that were with him,
exhorted them not to be reconciled to the enemies, nor to fear the
multitude of the enemies who came wrongfully against them, but to fight
manfully:
thousand of them had no arms. 1 Mac. 4.6.
Setting before their eyes the injury they had unjustly done the
holy place, and also the injury they had done to the city, which had
been shamefully abused, besides their destroying the ordinances of the
fathers.
For, said he, they trust in their weapons, and in their boldness:
but we trust in the Almighty Lord, who at a beck can utterly destroy
both them that come against us, and the whole world.
Moreover, he put them in mind also of the helps their fathers had
received from God: and how, under Sennacherib, a hundred and eighty-five
thousand had been destroyed.
And of the battle that they had fought against the Galatians, in
point, and the Macedonians, their companions, were at a stand, slew a
hundred and twenty thousand, because of the help they had from heaven,
and for this they received many favours.
poured themselves in upon Asia, in immense multitudes, where also they
founded the kingdom of Galatia or Gallo Graecia.
With these words they were greatly encouraged and disposed even to
die for the laws and their country.
So he appointed his brethren captains over each division of his
army; Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, giving to each one fifteen
hundred men.
And after the holy book had been read to them by Esdras, and he
had given them for a watchword, The help of God: himself leading the
first band, he joined battle with Nicanor:
And the Almighty being their helper, they slew above nine thousand
men: and having wounded and disabled the greater part of Nicanor's army,
they obliged them to fly.
pursuit.
And they took the money of them that came to buy them, and they
pursued them on every side.
But they came back for want of time: for it was the day before the
sabbath: and therefore they did not continue the pursuit.
But when they had gathered together their arms and their spoils,
they kept the sabbath: blessing the Lord who had delivered them that
day, distilling the beginning of mercy upon them.
Then after the sabbath they divided the spoils to the feeble and
the orphans, and the widows, and the rest they took for themselves and
their servants.
When this was done, and they had all made a common supplication,
they besought the merciful Lord, to be reconciled to his servants unto
the end.
Moreover, they slew above twenty thousand of them that were with
themselves masters of the high strong holds: and they divided amongst
them many spoils, giving equal portions to the feeble, the fatherless,
and the widows; yea, and the aged also.
And when they had carefully gathered together their arms, they
laid them all up in convenient places, and the residue of their spoils
they carried to Jerusalem:
They slew also Philarches, who was with Timotheus, a wicked man,
who had many ways afflicted the Jews.
And when they kept the feast of the victory at Jerusalem, they
burnt Callisthenes, that had set fire to the holy gates, who had taken
refuge in a certain house, rendering to him a worthy reward for his
impieties:
But as for that most wicked man, Nicanor, who had brought a
thousand merchants to the sale of the Jews,
Being, through the help of the Lord, brought down by them, of whom
he had made no account, laying aside his garment of glory, fleeing
through the midland country, he came alone to Antioch, being rendered
very unhappy by the destruction of his army.
which he wore through ostentation; he now throws it off, lest he should
be known on his flight.
And he that had promised to levy the tribute for the Romans, by
the means of the captives of Jerusalem, now professed that the Jews had
they followed the laws appointed by him.
At that time Antiochus returned with dishonour out of Persia.
For he had entered into the city called Persepolis, and attempted
to rob the temple, and to oppress the city, but the multitude running
together to arms, put them to flight: and so it fell out that Antiochus
being put to flight, returned with disgrace.
Now when he was come about Ecbatana, he received the news of what
had happened to Nicanor and Timotheus.
And swelling with anger, he thought to revenge upon the Jews the
injury done by them that had put him to flight. And therefore he
commanded his chariot to be driven, without stopping in his journey, the
judgment of heaven urging him forward, because he had spoken so proudly,
that he would come to Jerusalem, and make it a common burying place of
the Jews.
But the Lord, the God of Israel, that seeth all things, struck him
with an incurable and an invisible plague. For as soon as he had ended
these words, a dreadful pain in his bowels came upon him, and bitter
torments of the inner parts.
And indeed very justly, seeing he had tormented the bowels of
others with many and new torments, albeit he by no means ceased from his
malice.
Moreover, being filled with pride, breathing out fire in his rage
against the Jews, and commanding the matter to be hastened, it happened
as he was going with violence, that he fell from the chariot, so that
his limbs were much pained by a grievous bruising of the body.
Thus he that seemed to himself to command even the waves of the
sea, being proud above the condition of man, and to weigh the heights of
the mountains in a balance, now being cast down to the ground, was
carried in a litter, bearing witness to the manifest power of God in
himself:
So that worms swarmed out of the body of this man, and whilst he
lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell off, and the filthiness of his
smell was noisome to the army.
And the man that thought a little before he could reach to the
stars of heaven, no man could endure to carry, for the intolerable
stench.
And by this means, being brought from his great pride, he began to
come to the knowledge of himself, being admonished by the scourge of
And when he himself could not now abide his own stench, he spoke
thus: It is just to be subject to God, and that a mortal man should not
equal himself to God.
Then this wicked man prayed to the Lord, of whom he was not like
to obtain mercy.
not for the offence committed against God: but barely on account of his
present sufferings.
And the city, to which he was going in haste to lay it even with
the ground, and to make it a common burying place, he now desireth to
make free:
And the Jews, whom he said he would not account worthy to be so
much as buried, but would give them up to be devoured by the birds and
wild beasts, and would utterly destroy them with their children, he now
promiseth to make equal with the Athenians.
The holy temple also, which before he had spoiled, he promised to
adorn with goodly gifts, and to multiply the holy vessels, and to allow
out of his revenues the charges pertaining to the sacrifices.
Yea also, that he would become a Jew himself, and would go through
every place of the earth, and declare the power of God.
But his pains not ceasing, (for the just judgment of God was come
upon him) despairing of life, he wrote to the Jews, in the manner of a
supplication, a letter in these words:
To his very good subjects the Jews, Antiochus, king and ruler,
wisheth much health, and welfare, and happiness.
If you and your children are well, and if all matters go with you
to your mind, we give very great thanks.
As for me, being infirm, but yet kindly remembering you, returning
out of the places of Persia, and being taken with a grievous disease, I
thought it necessary to take care for the common good:
Not distrusting my life, but having great hope to escape the
sickness.
But considering that my father also, at what time he led an army
into the higher countries, appointed who should reign after him:
To the end that if any thing contrary to expectation should fall
out, or any bad tidings should be brought, they that were in the
countries, knowing to whom the whole government was left, might not be
troubled.
Moreover, considering that neighbouring princes, and borderers,
wait for opportunities, and expect what shall be the event, I have
appointed my son, Antiochus, king, whom I often recommended to many of
you, when I went into the higher provinces: and I have written to him
what I have joined here below.
I pray you, therefore, and request of you, that, remembering
favours both public and private, you will every man of you continue to
be faithful to me and to my son.
For I trust that he will behave with moderation and humanity, and
following my intentions, will be gracious unto you.
Thus the murderer and blasphemer being grievously struck, as
himself had treated others, died a miserable death in a strange country,
among the mountains.
But Philip, that was brought up with him, carried away his body:
and out of fear of the son of Antiochus, went into Egypt to Ptolemee
victory over Timotheus.
But Machabeus, and they that were with him, by the protection of
the Lord, recovered the temple and the city again.
But he threw down the altars which the heathens had set up in the
streets, as also the temples of the idols.
And having purified the temple, they made another altar: and
taking fire out of the fiery stones, they offered sacrifices after two
years, and set forth incense, and lamps, and the loaves of proposition.
And when they had done these things, they besought the Lord, lying
prostrate on the ground, that they might no more fall into such evils;
but if they should at any time sin, that they might be chastised by him
more gently, and not be delivered up to barbarians and blasphemous men.
Now upon the same day that the temple had been polluted by the
strangers on the very same day it was cleansed again; to wit, on the
five and twentieth day of the month of Casleu.
And they kept eight days with joy, after the manner of the feast
of the tabernacles, remembering that not long before they had kept the
feast of the tabernacles when they were in the mountains, and in dens
like wild beasts.
Therefore they now carried boughs and green branches and palms,
for him that had given them good success in cleansing his place.
And they ordained by a common statute, and decree, that all the
nation of the Jews should keep those days every year.
And this was the end of Antiochus, that was called the
But now we will repeat the acts of Eupator, the son of that
wicked Antiochus, abridging the account of the evils that happened in
the wars.
For when he was come to the crown, he appointed over the affairs
of his realm one Lysias, general of the army of Phenicia and Syria.
For Ptolemee, that was called Macer, was determined to be
strictly just to the Jews and especially by reason of the wrong that had
been done them, and to deal peaceably with them.
But being accused for this to Eupator by his friends, and being
oftentimes called traitor, because he had left Cyprus, which
poison.
But Gorgias, who was governor of the holds, taking with him the
strangers, often fought against the Jews.
And the Jews that occupied the most commodious holds, received
those that were driven out of Jerusalem, and attempted to make war.
and were enemies of their country, who joining with the Idumeans or
their countrymen.
Then they that were with Machabeus, beseeching the Lord by
prayers to be their helper, made a strong attack upon the strong holds
of the Idumeans:
And assaulting them with great force, won the holds, killed them
that came in the way, and slew altogether no fewer than twenty thousand.
And whereas some were fled into very strong towers, having all
manner of provision to sustain a siege,
Machabeus left Simon and Joseph, and Zacheus, and them that were
with them, in sufficient number to besiege them, and departed to those
expeditions which urged more.
Now they that were with Simon, being led with covetousness, were
persuaded for the sake of money by some that were in the towers: and
taking seventy thousand didrachmas, let some of them escape.
But when it was told Machabeus what was done, he assembled the
rulers of the people, and accused those men that they had sold their
brethren for money, having let their adversaries escape.
So he put these traitors to death, and forthwith took the two
towers.
And having good success in arms, and all things he took in hand,
he slew more than twenty thousand in the two holds.
But Timotheus, who before had been overcome by the Jews, having
called together a multitude of foreign troops, and assembled horsemen
out of Asia, came as though he would take Judea by force of arms.
But Machabeus, and they that were with him, when he drew near,
prayed to the Lord, sprinkling earth upon their heads, and girding their
loins with haircloth,
And lying prostrate at the foot of the altar, besought him to be
merciful to them, and to be an enemy to their enemies, and an adversary
to their adversaries, as the law saith.
And so after prayer taking their arms, they went forth further
from the city, and when they were come very near the enemies they
rested.
But as soon as the sun was risen both sides joined battle: the
one part having, with their valour, the Lord for a surety of victory,
and success: but the other side making their rage their leader in
battle.
But when they were in the heat of the engagement, there appeared
to the enemies from heaven five men upon horses, comely, with golden
bridles, conducting the Jews:
Two of them took Machabeus between them, and covered him on every
side with their arms, and kept him safe; but cast darts and fireballs
against the enemy, so that they fell down, being both confounded with
blindness, and filled with trouble.
And there were slain twenty thousand five hundred, and six
hundred horsemen.
But Timotheus fled into Gazara, a strong hold where Chereas was
governor.
Then Machabeus, and they that were with him cheerfully laid siege
to the fortress four days.
But they that were within, trusting to the strength of the place,
blasphemed exceedingly, and cast forth abominable words.
But when the fifth day appeared, twenty young men of them that
were with Machabeus, inflamed in their minds, because of the blasphemy,
approached manfully to the wall, and pushing forward with fierce
courage, got up upon it:
Moreover, others also getting up after them, went to set fire to
the towers and the gates, and to burn the blasphemers alive.
And having for two days together pillaged and sacked the
fortress, they killed Timotheus, who was found hid in a certain place:
they slew also his brother Chereas, and Apollophanes.
different from that Timotheus who is mentioned in the fifth chapter of
the first book of Machabees, and of whom there is mention in the
following chapter.
And when this was done, they blessed the Lord with hymns and
thanksgiving, who had done great things in Israel, and given them the
victory.
A short time after this Lysias, the king's lieutenant, and cousin,
and who had chief charge over all the affairs, being greatly displeased
with what had happened,
Gathered together fourscore thousand men, and all the horsemen,
and came against the Jews, thinking to take the city, and make it a
habitation of the Gentiles:
And to make a gain of the temple, as of the other temples of the
Never considering the power of God, but puffed up in mind, and
trusting in the multitude of his foot soldiers, and the thousands of his
horsemen, and his fourscore elephants.
So he came into Judea, and approaching to Bethsura, which was in a
narrow place, the space of five furlongs from Jerusalem, he laid siege
to that fortress.
But when Machabeus, and they that were with him, understood that
the strong holds were besieged, they and all the people besought the
save Israel.
Then Machabeus himself first taking his arms, exhorted the rest to
expose themselves together with him, to the danger, and to succour their
brethren.
And when they were going forth together with a willing mind, there
appeared at Jerusalem a horseman going before them in white clothing,
with golden armour, shaking a spear.
Then they all together blessed the merciful Lord, and took great
courage: being ready to break through not only men, but also the
fiercest beasts, and walls of iron.
So they went on courageously, having a helper from heaven, and
the Lord, who shewed mercy to them.
And rushing violently upon the enemy, like lions, they slew of
them eleven thousand footmen, and one thousand six hundred horsemen:
And put all the rest to flight; and many of them being wounded,
escaped naked: Yea, and Lysias himself fled away shamefully, and
escaped.
And as he was a man of understanding, considering with himself
the loss he had suffered, and perceiving that the Hebrews could not be
overcome, because they relied upon the help of the Almighty God, he sent
to them:
And promised that he would agree to all things that are just, and
that he would persuade the king to be their friend.
Then Machabeus consented to the request of Lysias, providing for
the common good in all things; and whatsoever Machabeus wrote to Lysias,
concerning the Jews, the king allowed of.
For there were letters written to the Jews from Lysias, to this
effect: Lysias, to the people of the Jews, greeting.
John, and Abesalom, who were sent from you, delivering your
writings, requested that I would accomplish those things which were
signified by them.
Therefore whatsoever things could be reported to the king, I
have represented to him: and he hath granted as much as the matter
permitted.
If, therefore, you will keep yourselves loyal in affairs,
hereafter also I will endeavour to be a means of your good.
But as concerning other particulars, I have given orders by word
both to these, and to them that are sent by me, to commune with you.
Fare ye well. In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the four
and twentieth day of the month of Dioscorus.
writer of the first book of Machabees. However, by this date, as well as
by other circumstances, it appears that the expedition of Lysias,
mentioned in this chapter, is different from that which is recorded, 1
But the king's letter contained these words King Antiochus to
Our father being translated amongst the gods we are desirous that
they that are in our realm should live quietly, and apply themselves
diligently to their own concerns.
And we have heard that the Jews would not consent to my father to
turn to the rites of the Greeks but that they would keep to their own
manner of living and therefore that they request us to allow them to
live after their own laws.
Wherefore being desirous that this nation also should be at rest,
we have ordained and decreed, that the temple should be restored to
them, and that they may live according to the custom of their ancestors.
Thou shalt do well, therefore, to send to them, and grant them
peace, that our pleasure being known, they may be of good comfort, and
look to their own affairs.
But the king's letter to the Jews was in this manner: King
greeting.
If you are well, you are as we desire: we ourselves also are
well.
Menelaus came to us, saying that you desired to come down to your
countrymen, that are with us.
We grant, therefore, a safe conduct to all that come and go,
until the thirtieth day of the month of Xanthicus,
That the Jews may use their own kind of meats, and their own
laws, as before: and that none of them any manner of ways be molested
for things which have been done by ignorance.
And we have sent also Menelaus to speak to you.
Fare ye well. In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the
fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.
The Romans also sent them a letter, to this effect: Quintus
the Jews, greeting.
Whatsoever Lysias, the king's cousin, hath granted to you, we
also have granted.
But touching such things as he thought should be referred to the
king, after you have diligently conferred among yourselves, send some
one forthwith, that we may decree as it is convenient for you: for we
are going to Antioch.
And therefore make haste to write back, that we may know of what
mind you are.
Fare ye well. In the year one hundred and forty-eight, the
fifteenth day of the month of Xanthicus.
victories over them. He orders sacrifice and prayers for the dead.
When these covenants were made, Lysias went to the king, and the
But they that were behind, viz. Timotheus, and Apollonius, the son
of Genneus, also Hieronymus, and Demophon, and besides them Nicanor, the
governor of Cyprus, would not suffer them to live in peace, and to be
quiet.
The men of Joppe also were guilty of this kind of wickedness: they
desired the Jews, who dwelt among them, to go with their wives and
children into the boats, which they had prepared, as though they had no
enmity to them.
Which when they had consented to, according to the common decree
of the city, suspecting nothing, because of the peace: when they were
gone forth into the deep, they drowned no fewer than two hundred of
them.
But as soon as Judas heard of this cruelty done to his countrymen,
he commanded the men that were with him: and after having called upon
He came against those murderers of his brethren, and set the haven
on fire in the night, burnt the boats, and slew with the sword them that
escaped from the fire.
And when he had done these things in this manner, he departed as
if he would return again, and root out all the Joppites.
But when he understood that the men of Jamnia also designed to do
in like manner to the Jews that dwelt among them,
He came upon the Jamnites also by night, and set the haven on
fire, with the ships, so that the light of the fire was seen at
And when they were now gone from thence nine furlongs, and were
marching towards Timotheus, five thousand footmen, and five hundred
horsemen of the Arabians, set upon them.
And after a hard fight, in which, by the help of God, they got
the victory, the rest of the Arabians being overcome, besought Judas for
peace, promising to give him pastures, and to assist him in other
things.
And Judas thinking that they might be profitable indeed in many
things, promised them peace, and after having joined hands, they
departed to their tents.
He also laid siege to a certain strong city, encompassed with
bridges and walls, and inhabited by multitudes of different nations, the
name of which is Casphin.
But they that were within it, trusting in the strength of the
walls, and the provision of victuals, behaved in a more negligent
manner, and provoked Judas with railing and blaspheming, and uttering
such words as were not to be spoken.
But Machabeus calling upon the great Lord of the world, who
without any rams or engines of war threw down the walls of Jericho, in
the time of Josue, fiercely assaulted the walls.
sieges in those times.
And having taken the city by the will of the Lord, he made an
unspeakable slaughter, so that a pool adjoining, of two furlongs broad,
seemed to run with the blood of the slain.
From thence they departed seven hundred and fifty furlongs, and
came to Characa, to the Jews that are called Tubianites.
But as for Timotheus, they found him not in those places, for
before he had dispatched any thing he went back, having left a very
strong garrison in a certain hold:
But Dositheus, and Sosipater, who were captains with Machabeus,
slew them that were left by Timotheus in the hold, to the number of ten
thousand men.
And Machabeus having set in order about him six thousand men, and
divided them by bands, went forth against Timotheus, who had with him a
hundred and twenty thousand footmen, and two thousand five hundred
horsemen.
Now when Timotheus had knowledge of the coming of Judas, he sent
the women and children, and the other baggage, before him into a
fortress, called Carnion: for it was impregnable, and hard to come at,
by reason of the straitness of the places.
But when the first band of Judas came in sight, the enemies were
struck with fear, by the presence of God, who seeth all things, and they
were put to flight one from another, so that they were often thrown down
by their own companions, and wounded with the strokes of their own
swords.
But Judas pursued them close, punishing the profane, of whom he
slew thirty thousand men.
And Timotheus himself fell into the hands of the band of
him go with his life, because he had the parents and brethren of many of
the Jews, who, by his death, might happen to be deceived.
And when he had given his faith that he would restore them
according to the agreement, they let him go without hurt, for the saving
of their brethren.
Then Judas went away to Carnion, where he slew five and twenty
thousand persons.
And after he had put to flight and destroyed these, he removed
his army to Ephron, a strong city, wherein there dwelt a multitude of
divers nations: and stout young men standing upon the walls, made a
vigorous resistance: and in this place there were many engines of war,
and a provision of darts.
But when they had invocated the Almighty, who with his power
breaketh the strength of the enemies, they took the city: and slew five
and twenty thousand of them that were within.
From thence they departed to Scythopolis, which lieth six hundred
furlongs from Jerusalem.
But the Jews that were among the Scythopolitans testifying that
they were used kindly by them, and that even in the times of their
adversity they had treated them with humanity:
They gave them thanks, exhorting them to be still friendly to
their nation, and so they came to Jerusalem, the feast of the weeks
being at hand.
And after Pentecost they marched against Gorgias, the governor of
And he came out with three thousand footmen and four hundred
horsemen.
And when they had joined battle, it happened that a few of the
But Dositheus, a horseman, one of Bacenor's band, a valiant man,
took hold of Gorgias: and when he would have taken him alive, a certain
horseman of the Thracians came upon him, and cut off his shoulder: and
so Gorgias escaped to Maresa.
But when they that were with Esdrin had fought long, and were
weary, Judas called upon the Lord to be their helper, and leader of the
battle:
Then beginning in his own language, and singing hymns with a loud
voice, he put Gorgias's soldiers to flight.
So Judas having gathered together his army, came into the city
according to the custom, and kept the sabbath in the same place.
And the day following Judas came with his company, to take away
the bodies of them that were slain, and to bury them with their kinsmen,
in the sepulchres of their fathers.
And they found under the coats of the slain, some of the donaries
of the idols of Jamnia, which the law forbiddeth to the Jews: so that
all plainly saw, that for this cause they were slain.
hung up in the temples of the idols, which they had taken away when they
burnt the port of Jamnia, ver. 9., contrary to the prohibition of the
law, Deut. 7.25.
Then they all blessed the just judgment of the Lord, who had
discovered the things that were hidden.
And so betaking themselves to prayers, they besought him, that
the sin which had been committed might be forgotten. But the most
valiant Judas exhorted the people to keep themselves from sin, forasmuch
as they saw before their eyes what had happened, because of the sins of
those that were slain.
And making a gathering, he sent twelve thousand drachms of silver
to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the dead,
thinking well and religiously concerning the resurrection.
(For if he had not hoped that they that were slain should rise
again, it would have seemed superfluous and vain to pray for the dead,)
And because he considered that they who had fallen asleep with
godliness, had great grace laid up for them.
cause of God and religion, might find mercy: either because they might
be excused from mortal sin by ignorance; or might have repented of their
sin, at least at their death.
It is therefore a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the
dead, that they may be loosed from sins.
the dead under the old law, which was then strictly observed by the
their chief and high priest, if it had not been always their custom.
king's great army is worsted twice. The peace is renewed.
In the year one hundred and forty-nine, Judas understood that
And with him Lysias, the regent, who had charge over the affairs
of the realm, having with him a hundred and ten thousand footmen, five
thousand horsemen, twenty-two elephants, and three hundred chariots.
here set down, and those recorded, 1 Mac. 4, is easily accounted for; if
we consider that such armies as these are liable to be at one time more
numerous than at another; either by sending away large detachments, or
being diminished by sickness; or increased by receiving fresh supplies
of troops, according to different exigencies or occurrences.
Menelaus also joined himself with them: and with great
deceitfulness besought Antiochus, not for the welfare of his country,
but in hopes that he should be appointed chief ruler.
But the King of kings stirred up the mind of Antiochus against the
sinner, and upon Lysias suggesting that he was the cause of all the
evils, he commanded (as the custom is with them) that he should be
apprehended and put to death in the same place.
Now there was in that place a tower fifty cubits high, having a
heap of ashes on every side: this had a prospect steep down.
From thence he commanded the sacrilegious wretch to be thrown down
into the ashes, all men thrusting him forward unto death.
And by such a law it happened that Menelaus the transgressor of
the law, was put to death: not having so much as burial in the earth.
And indeed very justly, for insomuch as he had committed many sins
against the altar of God, the fire and ashes of which were holy: he was
condemned to die in ashes.
But the king, with his mind full of rage, came on to shew himself
worse to the Jews than his father was.
Which when Judas understood, he commanded the people to call upon
the Lord day and night, that as he had always done, so now also he would
help them:
Because they were afraid to be deprived of the law, and of their
country, and of the holy temple: and that he would not suffer the
people, that had of late taken breath for a little while, to be again in
subjection to blasphemous nations.
So when they had all done this together, and had craved mercy of
the Lord with weeping and fasting, lying prostrate on the ground for
three days continually, Judas exhorted them to make themselves ready.
But he, with the ancients, determined before the king should
bring his army into Judea, and make himself master of the city, to go
out, and to commit the event of the thing to the judgment of the Lord.
So committing all to God, the Creator of the world, and having
exhorted his people to fight manfully, and to stand up even to death for
the laws, the temple, the city, their country, and citizens: he placed
his army about Modin.
And having given his company for a watchword, The victory of God,
with most valiant chosen young men, he set upon the king's quarter by
night, and slew four thousand men in the camp, and the greatest of the
elephants, with them that had been upon him,
And having filled the camp of the enemies with exceeding great
fear and tumult, they went off with good success.
Now this was done at the break of day, by the protection and help
of the Lord.
But the king having taken a taste of the hardiness of the Jews,
attempted to take the strong places by policy:
And he marched with his army to Bethsura, which was a strong hold
of the Jews: but he was repulsed, he failed, he lost his men.
Now Judas sent necessaries to them that were within
But Rhodocus, one of the Jews' army, disclosed the secrets to the
enemies, so he was sought out, and taken up, and put in prison.
Again the king treated with them that were in Bethsura: gave his
right hand: took theirs: and went away.
He fought with Judas: and was overcome. And when he understood
that Philip, who had been left over the affairs, had rebelled at
yielding to them, he swore to all things that seemed reasonable, and,
being reconciled, offered sacrifice, honoured the temple, and left
gifts.
He embraced Machabeus, and made him governor and prince from
But when he was come to Ptolemais, the men of that city were much
displeased with the conditions of the peace, being angry for fear they
should break the covenant.
Then Lysias went up to the judgment seat, and set forth the
reason, and appeased the people, and returned to Antioch: and thus
matters went with regard to the king's coming and his return.
priest: Nicanor is sent into Judea: his dealings with Judas: his
threats. The history of Razias.
But after the space of three years Judas, and they that were with
him, understood that Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, was come up with a
great power, and a navy by the haven of Tripolis, to places proper for
his purpose,
And had made himself master of the countries against Antiochus,
and his general, Lysias.
Now one Alcimus, who had been chief priest, but had wilfully
defiled himself in the time of mingling with the heathens, seeing that
there was no safety for him, nor access to the altar,
of Aaron, but for his apostasy here mentioned was incapable of the high
priesthood, but king Antiochus Eupator appointed him in place of the
high priest, (see above, 1 Mac. chap. 7., ver. 9,) as Menelaus had been
before him, set up by Antiochus, (above chap. 4.,)yet neither of them
were truly high priests; for the true high priesthood was amongst the
their religion, and were ordained according to the rites commanded in
the law of Moses.-Ibid. Mingling... with the heathens; that is, in their
idolatrous worship.
Came to king Demetrius in the year one hundred and fifty,
presenting unto him a crown of gold, and a palm, and besides these, some
boughs that seemed to belong to the temple. And that day indeed he held
his peace.
But having gotten a convenient time to further his madness, being
called to counsel by Demetrius, and asked what the Jews relied upon, and
what were their counsels,
He answered thereunto: They among the Jews that are called
seditions, and will not suffer the realm to be in peace.
For I also being deprived of my ancestor's glory (I mean of the
high priesthood) am now come hither:
Principally indeed out of fidelity to the king's interests, but in
the next place also to provide for the good of my countrymen: for all
our nation suffereth much from the evil proceedings of these men.
Wherefore, O king, seeing thou knowest all these things, take
care, I beseech thee, both of the country, and of our nation, according
to thy humanity which is known to all men.
For as long as Judas liveth it is not possible that the state
should be quiet.
Now when this man had spoken to this effect the rest also of the
king's friends, who were enemies of Judas, incensed Demetrius against
him.
And forthwith he sent Nicanor, the commander over the elephants,
governor into Judea:
Giving him in charge, to take Judas himself: and disperse all
them that were with him, and to make Alcimus the high priest of the
great temple.
Then the Gentiles who had fled out of Judea, from Judas, came to
be the welfare of their affairs.
Now when the Jews heard of Nicanor's coming, and that the nations
were assembled against them, they cast earth upon their heads, and made
supplication to him who chose his people to keep them for ever, and who
protected his portion by evident signs.
Then at the commandment of their captain, they forthwith removed
from the place where they were, and went to the town of Dessau, to meet
them.
Now Simon, the brother of Judas, had joined battle with Nicanor:
but was frightened with the sudden coming of the adversaries.
Nevertheless Nicanor hearing of the valour of Judas's companions,
and the greatness of courage, with which they fought for their country,
was afraid to try the matter by the sword.
Wherefore he sent Posidonius, and Theodotius and Matthias before
to present and receive the right hands.
And when there had been a consultation thereupon, and the captain
had acquainted the multitude with it, they were all of one mind to
consent to covenants.
So they appointed a day upon which they might come together by
themselves: and seats were brought out, and set for each one.
But Judas ordered armed men to be ready in convenient places,
lest some mischief might be suddenly practised by the enemies: so they
made an agreeable conference.
And Nicanor abode in Jerusalem, and did no wrong, but sent away
the flocks of the multitudes that had been gathered together.
And Judas was always dear to him from the heart, and he was well
affected to the man.
And he desired him to marry a wife, and to have children. So he
married: he lived quietly, and they lived in common.
But Alcimus seeing the love they had one to another, and the
covenants, came to Demetrius, and told him that Nicanor had assented to
the foreign interest, for that he meant to make Judas, who was a traitor
to the kingdom, his successor.
Then the king, being in a rage, and provoked with this man's
wicked accusation, wrote to Nicanor, signifying that he was greatly
displeased with the covenant of friendship: and that he commanded him
nevertheless to send Machabeus prisoner in all haste to Antioch.
When this was known, Nicanor was in a consternation, and took it
grievously that he should make void the articles that were agreed upon,
having received no injury from the man.
But because he could not oppose the king, he watched an
opportunity to comply with the orders.
But when Machabeus perceived that Nicanor was more stern to him,
and that when they met together as usual he behaved himself in a rough
manner; and was sensible that this rough behaviour came not of good, he
gathered together a few of his men, and hid himself from Nicanor.
But he finding himself notably prevented by the man, came to the
great and holy temple: and commanded the priests that were offering the
accustomed sacrifices, to deliver him the man.
And when they swore unto him, that they knew not where the man
was whom he sought, he stretched out his hand to the temple,
And swore, saying: Unless you deliver Judas prisoner to me, I
will lay this temple of God even with the ground, and will beat down the
altar, and I will dedicate this temple to Bacchus.
And when he had spoken thus, he departed.  But the priests
stretching forth their hands to heaven, called upon him that was ever
the defender of their nation, saying in this manner:
Thou, O Lord of all things, who wantest nothing, wast pleased
that the temple of thy habitation should be amongst us.
Therefore now, O Lord, the holy of all holies, keep this house
for ever undefiled, which was lately cleansed.
Now Razias, one of the ancients of Jerusalem, was accused to
his kindness was called the father of the Jews.
This man, for a long time, had held fast his purpose of keeping
himself pure in the Jews' religion, and was ready to expose his body and
life, that he might persevere therein.
So Nicanor being willing to declare the hatred that he bore the
For he thought by ensnaring him to hurt the Jews very much.
Now as the multitude sought to rush into his house, and to break
open the door, and to set fire to it, when he was ready to be taken, he
struck himself with his sword:
lib. 2, cap. 23, ad Epist. 2, Gaud.) discussing this fact of Razias,
says, that the holy scripture relates it, but doth not praise it, as to
be admired or imitated, and that either it was not well done by him, or
at least not proper in this time of grace.
Choosing to die nobly rather than to fall into the hands of the
wicked, and to suffer abuses unbecoming his noble birth.
But whereas through haste he missed of giving a sure wound, and
the crowd was breaking into the doors, he ran boldly to the wall, and
manfully threw himself down to the crowd:
But they quickly making room for his fall, he came upon the midst
of the neck.
building.
And as he had yet breath in him, being inflamed in mind, he
arose: and while his blood ran down with a great stream, and he was
grievously wounded, he ran through the crowd:
And standing upon a steep rock, when he was now almost without
blood, grasping his bowels, with both hands he cast them upon the
throng, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, to restore these to
him again: and so he departed this life.
conclusion.
But when Nicanor understood that Judas was in the places of
day.
And when the Jews that were constrained to follow him, said: Do
not act so fiercely and barbarously, but give honour to the day that is
sanctified: and reverence him that beholdeth all things:
That unhappy man asked, if there were a mighty One in heaven, that
had commanded the sabbath day to be kept.
And when they answered: There is the living Lord himself in
heaven, the mighty One, that commanded the seventh day to be kept.
Then he said: And I am mighty upon the earth, and I command to
take arms, and to do the king's business. Nevertheless he prevailed not
to accomplish his design.
So Nicanor being puffed up with exceeding great pride, thought to
set up a public monument of his victory over Judas.
But Machabeus ever trusted with all hope that God would help them.
And he exhorted his people not to fear the coming of the nations,
but to remember the help they had before received from heaven, and now
to hope for victory from the Almighty.
And speaking to them out of the law, and the prophets, and withal
putting them in mind of the battles they had fought before, he made them
more cheerful:
Then after he had encouraged them, he shewed withal the falsehood
of the Gentiles, and their breach of oaths.
So he armed every one of them, not with defence of shield and
spear, but with very good speeches, and exhortations, and told them a
dream worthy to be believed, whereby he rejoiced them all.
Now the vision was in this manner. Onias, who had been high
priest, a good and virtuous man, modest in his looks, gentle in his
manners, and graceful in speech, and who from a child was exercised in
virtues holding up his hands, prayed for all the people of the Jews:
After this there appeared also another man, admirable for age,
and glory, and environed with great beauty and majesty:
Then Onias answering, said: This is a lover of his brethren, and
of the people of Israel: this is he that prayeth much for the people,
and for all the holy city, Jeremias, the prophet of God.
Whereupon Jeremias stretched forth his right hand, and gave to
Take this holy sword, a gift from God, wherewith thou shalt
overthrow the adversaries of my people Israel.
Thus being exhorted with the words of Judas, which were very
good, and proper to stir up the courage, and strengthen the hearts of
the young men, they resolved to fight, and to set upon them manfully:
that valour might decide the matter, because the holy city, and the
temple were in danger.
For their concern was less for their wives, and children, and for
their brethren, and kinsfolks: but their greatest and principal fear was
for the holiness of the temple.
And they also that were in the city, had no little concern for
them that were to be engaged in battle.
And now when all expected what judgment would be given, and the
enemies were at hand, and the army was set in array, the beasts and the
horsemen ranged in convenient places,
Machabeus considering the coming of the multitude, and the divers
preparations of armour, and the fierceness of the beasts, stretching out
his hands to heaven, called upon the Lord, that worketh wonders, who
giveth victory to them that are worthy, not according to the power of
their arms, but according as it seemeth good to him.
And in his prayer he said after this manner: Thou, O Lord, who
didst send thy angel in the time of Ezechias, king of Juda, and didst
kill a hundred and eighty-five thousand of the army of Sennacherib:
Send now also, O Lord of heaven, thy good angel before us, for
the fear and dread of the greatness of thy arm,
That they may be afraid, who come with blasphemy against thy holy
people. And thus he concluded his prayer.
But Nicanor, and they that were with him came forward, with
trumpets and songs.
But Judas, and they that were with him, encountered them, calling
upon God by prayers:
So fighting with their hands, but praying to the Lord with their
hearts, they slew no less than five and thirty thousand, being greatly
cheered with the presence of God.
And when the battle was over, and they were returning with joy,
they understood that Nicanor was slain in his armour.
Then making a shout, and a great noise, they blessed the Almighty
And Judas, who was altogether ready, in body and mind, to die for
his countrymen, commanded that Nicanor's head, and his hand, with the
shoulder, should be cut off, and carried to Jerusalem.
And when he was come thither, having called together his
countrymen, and the priests to the altar, he sent also for them that
were in the castle,
And shewing them the head of Nicanor, and the wicked hand, which
he had stretched out, with proud boasts, against the holy house of the
He commanded also, that the tongue of the wicked Nicanor should
be cut out, and given by pieces to birds, and the hand of the furious
man to be hanged up over against the temple.
Then all blessed the Lord of heaven, saying: Blessed be he that
hath kept his own place undefiled.
And he hung up Nicanor's head in the top of the castle, that it
might be an evident and manifest sign of the help of God.
And they all ordained by a common decree, by no means to let this
day pass without solemnity:
But to celebrate the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, called
in the Syrian language, the day before Mardochias' day.
So these things being done with relation to Nicanor, and from
that time the city being possessed by the Hebrews, I also will here make
an end of my narration.
Which if I have done well, and as it becometh the history, it is
what I desired: but if not so perfectly, it must be pardoned me.
the narration; but with regard to the style and manner of writing: which
in the sacred penmen is not always the most accurate. See St. Paul, 2
For as it is hurtful to drink always wine, or always water, but
pleasant to use sometimes the one, and sometimes the other: so if the
speech be always nicely framed, it will not be grateful to the readers.
