Adam, Seth, Enos,
Cainan, Malaleel, Jared,
Henoc, Mathusale, Lamech,
Noe, Sem, Cham, and Japheth.
The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan,
And the sons of Gomer: Ascenez, and Riphath, and Thogorma.
And the sons of Javan: Elisa and Tharsis, Cethim and Dodanim.
The sons of Cham: Chus, and Mesrai, and Phut, and Chanaan.
And the sons of Chus: Saba, and Hevila, Sabatha, and Regma, and
Now Chus begot Nemrod: he began to be mighty upon earth.
But Mesraim begot Ludim, and Anamim, and Laabim, and Nephtuim,
Phetrusim also, and Casluim: from whom came the Philistines, and
And Chanaan begot Sidon his firstborn, and the Hethite,
And the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite, and the Gergesite,
And the Hevite, and the Aracite, and the Sinite,
And the Aradian, and the Samarite, and the Hamathite.
The sons of Sem: Elam and Asur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram,
and Hus, and Hul, and Gether, and Mosoch.
And Arphaxad begot Sale, and Sale begot Heber.
And to Heber were born two sons, the name of the one was Phaleg,
because in his days the earth was divided; and the name of his brother
was Jectan.
And Jectan begot Elmodad, and Saleph, and Asarmoth, and Jare,
And Adoram, and Usal, and Decla,
And Hebal, and Abimael, and Saba,
And Ophir, and Hevila, and Jobab. All these are the sons of
Sem, Arphaxad, Sale,
Heber, Phaleg, Ragau,
Serug, Nachor, Thare,
Abram, this is Abraham.
And the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Ismahel.
And these are the generations of them. The firstborn of Ismahel,
And Masma, and Duma, Massa, Hadad, and Thema,
Jetur, Naphis, Cedma: these are the sons of Ismahel.
And the sons of Cetura, Abraham's concubine, whom she bore:
And the sons of Madian: Epha, and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida,
and Eldaa. All these are the sons of Cetura.
And Abraham begot Isaac: and his sons were Esau and Israel.
The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Rahuel, Jehus, Ihelom, and Core.
The sons of Eliphaz: Theman, Omar, Sephi, Gathan, Cenez, and by
The sons of Rahuel: Nahath, Zara, Samma, Meza.
The sons of Seir: Lotan, Sobal, Sebeon, Ana, Dison, Eser, Disan.
The sons of Lotan: Hori, Homam. And the sister of Lotan was
The sons of Sobal: Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Sephi, and Onam.
The sons of Dison: Hamram, and Eseban, and Jethran, and Charan.
The sons of Eser: Balaan, and Zavan, and Jacan. The sons of Disan:
Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before
there was a king over the children of Israel: Bale the son of Beor: and
the name of his city was Denaba.
And Bale died, and Jobab the son of Zare of Bosra, reigned in his
stead.
And when Jobab also was dead, Husam of the land of the Themanites
reigned in his stead.
And Husam also died, and Adad the son of Badad reigned in his
stead, and he defeated the Madianites in the land of Moab: the name of
his city was Avith.
And when Adad also was dead, Semla of Masreca reigned in his
stead.
Semla also died, and Saul of Rohoboth, which is near the river,
reigned in his stead.
And when Saul was dead, Balanan the son of Achobor reigned in his
stead.
He also died, and Adad reigned in his stead: and the name of his
city was Phau, and his wife was called Meetabel the daughter of Matred,
the daughter of Mezaab.
And after the death of Adad, there began to be dukes in Edom
instead of kings: duke Thamna, duke Alva, duke Jetheth,
Duke Oolibama, duke Ela, duke Phinon,
Duke Cenez, duke Theman, duke Mabsar,
Duke Magdiel, duke Hiram. These are the dukes of Edom.
genealogies of the tribe of Juda.
And these are the sons of Israel: Ruben, Simeon, Levi, Juda,
Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Nephtali, Gad, and Aser.
The sons of Juda: Her, Onan and Sela. These three were born to him
of the Chanaanitess the daughter of Sue. And Her the firstborn of Juda,
was wicked in the sight of the Lord, and he slew him.
And Thamar his daughter-in-law bore him Phares and Zara.  So all
the sons of Juda were five.
And the sons of Phares, were Hesron and Hamul.
And the sons also of Zare: Zamri, and Ethan, and Eman, and
And the sons of Charmi: Achar, who troubled Israel, and sinned by
the theft of the anathema.
accursed, viz., the spoils of Jericho.
The sons of Ethan: Azarias,
And the sons of Hesron that were born to him: Jerameel, and Ram,
and Calubi.
And Ram begot Aminadab, and Aminadab begot Nahasson, prince of the
children of Juda.
for all, that it was a common thing among the Hebrews for the same
persons to have different names: and that it is not impossible among so
many proper names, as here occur in the first nine chapters of this
book, that the transcribers of the ancient Hebrew copies may have made
some slips in the orthography.
And Nahasson begot Salma, the father of Booz.
And Booz begot Obed, and Obed begot Isai.
And Isai begot Eliab his firstborn, the second Abinadab, the third
The fourth, Nathanael, the fifth Raddai,
The sixth Asom, the seventh David.
And their sisters were Sarvia, and Abigail. The sons of Sarvia:
And Abigail bore Amasa, whose father was Jether the Ismahelite.
And Caleb the son of Hesron took a wife named Azuba, of whom he
had Jerioth: and her sons were Jaser, and Sobab, and Ardon.
And when Azuba was dead, Caleb took to wife Ephrata: who bore him
And Hur begot Uri: and Uri begot Bezeleel.
And afterwards Hesron went in to the daughter of Machir the father
of Galaad, and took her to wife when he was threescore years old: and
she bore him Segub.
And Segub begot Jair, and he had three and twenty cities in the
land of Galaad.
And he took Gessur, and Aram the towns of Jair, and Canath, and
the villages thereof, threescore cities. All these, the sons of Machir
father of Galaad.
And when Hesron was dead, Caleb went in to Ephrata. Hesron also
had to wife Abia who bore him Ashur the father of Thecua.
And the sons of Jerameel the firstborn of Hesron, were Ram his
firstborn, and Buna, and Aram, and Asom, and Achia.
And Jerameel married another wife, named Atara, who was the mother
of Onam.
And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerameel, were Moos, Jamin,
and Achar.
And Onam had sons Semei, and Jada. And the sons of Semei: Nadab,
and Abisur.
And the name of Abisur's wife was Abihail, who bore him Ahobban,
and Molid.
And the sons of Nadab were Saled and Apphaim. And Saled died
without children.
But the son of Apphaim was Jesi: and Jesi begot Sesan.  And Sesan
begot Oholai.
And the sons of Jada the brother of Semei: Jether and Jonathan.
But Jonathan begot Phaleth, and Ziza. These were the sons of
And Sesan had no sons, but daughters and a servant an Egyptian,
named Jeraa.
And he gave him his daughter to wife: and she bore him Ethei.
And Ethei begot Nathan, and Nathan begot Zabad.
And Zabad begot Ophlal, and Ophlal begot Obed.
Obed begot Jehu, Jehu begot Azarias.
Azarias begot Helles, and Helles begot Elasa.
Elasa begot Sisamoi, Sisamoi begot Sellum,
Sellum begot Icamia, and Icamia begot Elisama.
Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerameel were Mesa his
firstborn, who was the father of Siph: and the sons of Maresa father of
And the sons of Hebron, Core, and Thaphua, and Recem, and Samma.
And Samma begot Raham, the father of Jercaam, and Recem begot
The son of Sammai, Maon: and Maon the father of Bethsur.
And Epha the concubine of Caleb bore Haran, and Mosa, and Gezez.
And the sons of Jahaddai, Rogom, and Joathan, and Gesan, and
And Maacha the concubine of Caleb bore Saber, and Tharana.
And Saaph the father of Madmena begot Sue the father of Machbena,
and the father of Gabaa. And the daughter of Caleb was Achsa.
These were the sons of Caleb, the son of Hur the firstborn of
Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hariph the father of Bethgader.
And Sobal the father of Cariathiarim had sons: he that saw half of
the places of rest.
instead of the proper names, the meaning of those names in the Hebrew.
And of the kindred of Cariathiarim, the Jethrites, and Aphuthites,
and Semathites, and Maserites. Of them came the Saraites, and
The sons of Salma, Bethlehem, and Netophathi, the crowns of the
house of Joab, and half of the place of rest of Sarai.
And the families of the scribes that dwell in Jabes, singing and
making melody, and abiding in tents. These are the Cinites, who came of
Now these were the sons of David that were born to him in Hebron:
the firstborn Amnon of Achinoam the Jezrahelitess, the second Daniel of
The third Absalom the son of Maacha the daughter of Tolmai king of
The fifth Saphatias of Abital, the sixth Jethrahem of Egla his
wife.
So six sons were born to him in Hebron, where he reigned seven
years and six months. And in Jerusalem he reigned three and thirty
years.
And these sons were born to him in Jerusalem: Simmaa, and Sobab,
and Nathan, and Solomon, four of Bethsabee the daughter of Ammiel.
Jebaar also and Elisama,
And Eliphaleth, and Noge, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
And Elisama, and Eliada, and Elipheleth, nine:
All these the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines: and
they had a sister Thamar.
And Solomon's son was Roboam: whose son Abia begot Asa. And his
son was Josaphat,
The father of Joram: and Joram begot Ochozias, of whom was born
And his son Amasias begot Azarias. And Joathan the son of Azarias
Begot Achaz, the father of Ezechias, of whom was born Manasses.
And Manasses begot Amon the father of Josias.
And the sons of Josias were, the firstborn Johanan, the second
Of Joakim was born Jechonias, and Sedecias.
The sons of Jechonias were Asir, Salathiel,
Melchiram, Phadaia, Senneser and Jecemia, Sama, and Nadabia.
Of Phadaia were born Zorobabel and Semei. Zorobabel begot
Hasaba also, and Ohol, and Barachias, and Hasadias, Josabhesed,
five.
And the son of Hananias was Phaltias the father of Jeseias, whose
son was Raphaia. And his son was Arnan, of whom was born Obdia, whose
son was Sechenias.
The son of Sechenias was Semeia, whose sons were Hattus, and
The sons of Naaria, Elioenai, and Ezechias, and Ezricam, three.
The sons of Elioenai, Oduia, and Eliasub, and Pheleia, and Accub,
and Johanan, and Dalaia, and Anani, seven.
The sons of Juda: Phares, Hesron, and Charmi and Hur, and Sobal.
And Raia the son of Sobal begot Jahath, of whom were born Ahumai,
and Laad. These are the families of Sarathi.
And this is the posterity of Etam: Jezrahel, and Jesema, And
And Phanuel the father of Gedor, and Ezar the father of Hosa, these
are the sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephratha the father of Bethlehem.
And Assur the father of Thecua had two wives, Halaa and Naara:
And Naara bore him Ozam, and Hepher, and Themani, and Ahasthari:
these are the sons of Naara.
And the sons of Halaa, Sereth, Isaar, and Ethnan.
And Cos begot Anob, and Soboba, and the kindred of Aharehel the son
of Arum.
And Jabes was more honourable than any of his brethren, and his
mother called his name Jabes, saying: Because I bore him with sorrow.
And Jabes called upon the God of Israel, saying: If blessing thou
wilt bless me, and wilt enlarge my borders, and thy hand be with me, and
thou save me from being oppressed by evil. And God granted him the
things he prayed for.
And Caleb the brother of Sua begot Mahir, who was the father of
And Esthon begot Bethrapha, and Phesse, and Tehinna father of the
city of Naas: these are the men of Recha.
And the sons of Cenez were Othoniel, and Saraia. And the sons of
Maonathi begot Ophra, and Saraia begot Joab the father of the
And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephone, were Hir, and Ela, and
The sons also of Jaleleel: Ziph, and Zipha, Thiria and Asrael.
And the sons of Esra, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon, and
he begot Mariam, and Sammai, and Jesba the father of Esthamo.
And his wife Judaia, bore Jared the father of Gedor, and Heber the
father of Socho, and Icuthiel the father of Zanoe. And these are the
sons of Bethia the daughter of Pharao, whom Mered took to wife.
And the sons of his wife Odaia the sister of Naham the father of
The sons also of Simon, Amnon, and Rinna the son of Hanan, and
The sons of Sela the son of Juda: Her the father of Lecha, and
wrought fine linen in the House of oath.
And he that made the sun to stand, and the men of Lying, and
is, he that made the sun to stand. In like manner the following names,
place of the Hebrew names of the same signification.
These are the potters, and they dwelt in Plantations, and Hedges,
with the king for his works, and they abode there.
they dwelt. In Hebrew Atharim and Gadira.
The sons of Simeon: Namuel and Jamin, Jarib, Zara, Saul:
Sellum his son, Mapsam his son, Masma his son.
The sons of Masma: Hamuel his son, Zachur his son, Semei his son.
The sons of Semei were sixteen, and six daughters: but his
brethren had not many sons, and the whole kindred could not reach to the
sum of the children of Juda.
And they dwelt in Bersabee, and Molada, and Hasarsuhal,
And in Bala, and in Asom, and in Tholad,
And in Bathuel, and in Horma, and in Siceleg,
And in Bethmarchaboth, and in Hasarsusim, and in Bethberai, and in
Their towns also were Etam, and Aen, Remmon, and Thochen, and
And all their villages round about these cities as far as Baal.
And Mosabab and Jemlech, and Josaphat, the son of Amasias,
And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josabia the son of Saraia, the son
of Asiel,
And Elioenai, and Jacoba, and Isuhaia, and Asaia, and Adiel, and
Ziza also the son of Sephei the son of Allon the son of Idaia the
son of Semri the son of Samaia.
These were named princes in their kindreds, and in the houses of
their families were multiplied exceedingly.
And they went forth to enter into Gador as far as to the east side
of the valley, to seek pastures for their flocks.
And they found fat pastures, and very good, and a country
spacious, and quiet, and fruitful, in which some of the race of Cham had
dwelt before.
And these whose names are written above, came in the days of
inhabitants that were found there, and utterly destroyed them unto this
day: and they dwelt in their place, because they found there fat
pastures.
Some also of the children of Simeon, five hundred men, went into
mount Seir, having for their captains Phaltias and Naaria and Raphaia
and Oziel the sons of Jesi:
And they slew the remnant of the Amalecites, who had been able to
escape, and they dwelt there in their stead unto this day.
captivity.
Now the sons of Ruben the firstborn of Israel, (for he was his
firstborn: but forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his first
birthright was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, and he was
not accounted for the firstborn.
But of the race of Juda, who was the strongest among his brethren,
came the princes: but the first birthright was accounted to Joseph.)
the firstborn; but the princely dignity was given to Juda, and the
priesthood to Levi.
The sons then of Ruben the firstborn of Israel were Enoch, and
The sons of Joel: Samaia his son, Gog his son, Semei his son,
Micha his son, Reia his son, Baal his son,
Beera his son, whom Thelgathphalnasar king of the Assyrians carried
away captive, and he was prince in the tribe of Ruben.
And his brethren, and all his kindred, when they were numbered by
their families, had for princes Jehiel, and Zacharias.
And Bala the son of Azaz, the son of Samma, the son of Joel, dwelt
in Aroer as far as Nebo, and Beelmeon.
And eastward he had his habitation as far as the entrance of the
desert, and the river Euphrates. For they possessed a great number of
cattle in the land of Galaad.
And in the days of Saul they fought against the Agarites, and slew
them, and dwelt in their tents in their stead, in all the country, that
looketh to the east of Galaad.
And the children of Gad dwelt over against them in the land of
Johel the chief, and Saphan the second: and Janai, and Saphat in
And their brethren according to the houses of their kindreds, were
These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son of Jara,
the son of Galaad, the son of Michael, the son of Jesisi, the son of
And their brethren the sons of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of
the house in their families,
And they dwelt in Galaad, and in Basan and in the towns thereof,
and in all the suburbs of Saron, unto the borders.
All these were numbered in the days of Joathan king of Juda, and
in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.
The Sons of Ruben, and of Gad, and of the half tribe of Manasses,
fighting men, bearing shields, and swords, and bending the bow, and
trained up to battles, four and forty thousand seven hundred and
threescore that went out to war.
They fought against the Agarites: but the Itureans, and Naphis,
and Nodab,
Gave them help. And the Agarites were delivered into their hands,
and all that were with them, because they called upon God in the battle:
and he heard them, because they had put their faith in him.
And they took all that they possessed, of camels fifty thousand,
and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand,
and of men a hundred thousand souls.
And many fell down slain: for it was the battle of the Lord. And
they dwelt in their stead till the captivity.
And the children of the half tribe of Manasses possessed the land,
from the borders of Basan unto Baal, Hermon, and Sanir, and mount
And these were the heads of the house of their kindred, Epher, and
valiant and powerful men, and famous chiefs in their families.
But they forsook the God of their fathers, and went astray after
the gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed before them.
And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Phul king of the
carried away Ruben, and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses, and brought
them to Lahela, and to Habor, and to Ara, and to the river of Gozan,
unto this day.
The sons of Levi were Gerson, Caath, and Merari.
The Sons of Caath: Amram, Isaar, Hebron, and Oziel.
The children of Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Mary. The Sons of Aaron:
Eleazar begot Phinees, and Phinees begot Abisue,
And Abisue begot Bocci, and Bocci begot Ozi.
Ozi begot Zaraias, and Zaraias begot Maraioth.
And Maraioth begot Amarias, and Amarias begot Achitob.
Achitob begot Sadoc, and Sadoc begot Achimaas.
Achimaas begot Azarias, Azarias begot Johanan,
Johanan begot Azarias. This is he that executed the priestly
office in the house which Solomon built in Jerusalem.
And Azarias begot Amarias, and Amarias begot Achitob.
And Achitob begot Sadoc, and Sadoc begot Sellum,
Sellum begot Helcias, and Helcias begot Azarias,
Azarias begot Saraias, and Saraias begot Josedec.
Now Josedec went out, when the Lord carried away Juda, and
So the sons of Levi were Gerson, Caath, and Merari.
And these are the names of the sons of Gerson: Lobni and Semei.
The sons of Caath: Amram, and Isaar, and Hebron, and Oziel.
The sons of Merari: Moholi and Musi. And these are the kindreds of
Of Gerson: Lobni his son, Jahath his son, Zamma his son,
Joah his son, Addo his son, Zara his son, Jethrai his son.
The sons of Caath, Aminadab his son, Core his son, Asir his son,
Elcana his son, Abiasaph his son, Asir his son,
Thahath his son, Uriel his son, Ozias his son, Saul his son.
The sons of Elcana: Amasai, and Achimoth.
And Elcana. The sons of Elcana: Sophai his son, Nahath his son,
Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elcana his son.
The sons of Samuel: the firstborn Vasseni, and Abia.
And the sons of Merari, Moholi: Lobni his son, Semei his son, Oza
his son,
Sammaa his son, Haggia his son, Asaia his son.
These are they, whom David set over the singing men of the house
of the Lord, after that the ark was placed.
And they ministered before the tabernacle of the testimony, with
singing, until Solomon built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, and
they stood according to their order in the ministry.
And these are they that stood with their sons, of the sons of
The son of Elcana, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son
of Thohu,
The son of Suph, the son of Elcana, the son of Mahath, the son of
The son of Elcana, the son of Johel, the son of Azarias, the son
of Sophonias,
The son of Thahath, the son of Asir, the son of Abiasaph, the son
of Core,
The son of Isaar, the son of Caath, the son of Levi, the son of
And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, Asaph the son
of Barachias, the son of Samaa.
The son of Michael, the son of Basaia, the, son of Melchia.
The son of Athanai, the son of Zara, the son of Adaia.
The son of Ethan, the son of Zamma, the son of Semei.
The son of Jeth, the son of Gerson, the son of Levi.
And the sons of Merari their brethren, on the left hand, Ethan the
son of Cusi, the son of Abdi, the son of Meloch,
The son of Hasabia, the son of Amasai, the son of Helcias,
The son of Amasai, the son of Boni, the son of Somer,
The son of Moholi, the son of Musi, the son of Merari, the son of
Their brethren also the Levites, who were appointed for all the
ministry of the tabernacle of the house of the Lord.
But Aaron and his sons offered burnt offerings upon the altar of
holocausts, and upon the altar of incense, for every work of the holy of
holies: and to pray for Israel according to all that Moses the servant
of God had commanded.
And these are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinees his son,
Bocci his son, Ozi his son, Zarahia his son,
Meraioth his son, Amarias his son, Achitob his son,
Sadoc his son, Achimaas his son.
And these are their dwelling places by the towns and confines, to
wit, of the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Caathites: for they
fell to them by lot.
And they gave them Hebron in the land of Juda, and the suburbs
thereof round about:
But the fields of the city, and the villages to Caleb son of
And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities for refuge Hebron,
and Lobna, and the suburbs thereof,
And Jether and Esthemo, with their suburbs, and Helon, and Dabir
with their suburbs:
Asan also, and Bethsames, with their suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Benjamin: Gabee and its suburbs, Almath
with its suburbs, Anathoth also with its suburbs: all their cities
throughout their families were thirteen.
And to the sons of Caath that remained of their kindred they gave
out of the half tribe of Manasses ten cities in possession.
And to the sons of Gerson by their families out of the tribe of
And to the sons of Merari by their families out of the tribe of
they gave by lot twelve cities.
And the children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities, and
their suburbs.
And they gave them by lot, out of the tribe of the sons of Juda,
and out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the
sons of Benjamin, these cities which they called by their names.
And to them that were of the kindred of the sons of Caath, and the
cities in their borders were of the tribe of Ephraim.
And they gave the cities of refuge Sichem with its suburbs in
mount Ephraim, and Gazer with its suburbs,
Jecmaan also with its suburbs, and Beth-horon in like manner,
Helon also with its suburbs, and Gethremmon in like manner,
And out of the half tribe of Manasses, Aner and its suburbs,
the sons of Caath.
And to the sons of Gersom, out the kindred of the half tribe of
suburbs.
Out of the tribe of Issachar, Cedes and its suburbs, and Dabereth
with its suburbs;
Ramoth also and its suburbs, and Anem with its suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Aser: Masal with its suburbs, and Abdon in
like manner;
Hucac also and its suburbs, and Rohol with its suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Nephtali, Cedes in Galilee and its
suburbs, Hamon with its suburbs, and Cariathaim, and its suburbs.
And to the sons of Merari that remained: out of the tribe of
Beyond the Jordan also over against Jericho, on the east side of
the Jordan and out of the tribe of Ruben, Bosor in the wilderness with
its suburbs, and Jassa with its suburbs;
Cademoth also and its suburbs, and Mephaath with its suburbs;
Moreover also out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Galaad and its
suburbs, and Manaim with its suburbs;
Hesebon also with its suburbs, and Jazer with its suburbs.
Now the sons of Issachar were Thola, and Phua, Jasub and Simeron,
four.
The sons of Thola: Ozi and Raphaia, and Jeriel, and Jemai, and
posterity of Thola were numbered in the days of David, two and twenty
thousand six hundred most valiant men.
The sons of Ozi: Izrahia, of whom were born Michael, and Obadia,
and Joel, and Jesia, five all great men.
And there were with them by their families and peoples, six and
thirty thousand most valiant men ready for war: for they had many wives
and children.
Their brethren also throughout all the house of Issachar, were
numbered fourscore and seven thousand most valiant men for war.
The sons of Benjamin were Bela, and Bechor, and Jadihel, three.
The sons of Bela: Esbon, and Ozi, and Ozial, and Jerimoth and Urai,
five chiefs of their families, and most valiant warriors, and their
number was twenty-two thousand and thirty-four.
And the sons of Bechor were Zamira, and Joas, and Eliezer, and
all these were the sons of Bechor.
And they were numbered by the families, heads of their kindreds,
most valiant men for war, twenty thousand and two hundred.
And the son of Jadihel: Balan. And the sons of Balan: Jehus and
All these were sons of Jadihel, heads of their kindreds, most
valiant men, seventeen thousand and two hundred fifty to go out to war.
Sepham also and Hapham the sons of Hir: and Hasim the sons of
And the sons of Nephtali were Jasiel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
And the son of Manasses, Ezriel: and his concubine the Syrian bore
And Machir took wives for his sons Happhim, and Saphan: and he had
a sister named Maacha: the name of the second was Salphaad, and Salphaad
had daughters.
And Maacha the wife of Machir bore a son, and she called his name
and Recen.
And the son of Ulam, Baden. These are the sons of Galaad, the son
of Machir, the son of Manasses.
And his sister named Queen bore Goodlyman, and Abiezer, and
And the sons of Semida were Ahiu, and Sechem, and Leci and Aniam.
And the sons of Ephraim were Suthala, Bared his son, Thahath his
son, Elada his son, Thahath his son, and his son Zabad,
And his son Suthala, and his son Ezer, and Elad: and the men of
possessions.
And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came
to comfort him.
And he went in to his wife: and she conceived and bore a son, and
he called his name Beria, because he was born when it went evil with his
house:
And his daughter was Sara, who built Bethoron, the nether and the
upper, and Ozensara.
And Rapha was his son, and Reseph, and Thale, of whom was born
Who begot Laadan: and his son was Ammiud, who begot Elisama,
Of whom was born Nun, who had Josue for his son.
And their possessions and habitations were Bethel with her
daughters, and eastward Noran, and westward Gazer and her daughters,
And by the borders of the sons of Manasses Bethsan and her
daughters, Thanach and her daughters, Mageddo and her daughters: Dor and
her daughters: in these dwelt the children of Joseph, the son of Israel.
The children of Aser were Jemna, and Jesua, and Jessui, and Baria,
and Sara their sister.
And the sons of Baria: Haber, and Melchiel: he is the father of
And Heber begot Jephlat, and Somer, and Hotham, and Suaa their
sister.
The sons of Jephlat: Phosech, and Chamaal, and Asoth: these are
the sons of Jephlat.
And the sons of Somer: Ahi, and Roaga and Haba, and Aram.
And the sons of Helem his brother: Supha, and Jemna, and Selles,
and Amal.
The sons of Supha: Sue, Hernapher, and Sual, and Beri, and Jamra.
Bosor and Hod, and Samma, and Salusa, and Jethran, and Bera.
The sons of Jether: Jephone, and Phaspha, and Ara.
And the sons of Olla: Aree, and Haniel, and Resia.
All these were sons of Aser, heads of their families, choice and
most valiant captains of captains: and the number of them that were of
the age that was fit for war, was six and twenty thousand.
Now Benjamin begot Bale his firstborn, Asbel the second, Ahara the
third,
Nohaa the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
And the sons of Bale were Addar, and Gera, and Abiud,
And Abisue, and Naaman, and Ahoe,
And Gera, and Sephuphan, and Huram.
These are the sons of Abed, heads of families that dwelt in Gabaa,
who were removed into Manahath.
And Naaman, and Achia, and Gera he removed them, and begot Oza, and
And Saharim begot in the land of Moab, after he sent away Husim and
And he begot of Hodes his wife Jobab, and Sebia, and Mosa, and
And Jehus and Sechia, and Marma. These were his sons heads of
their families.
And Mehusim begot Abitob, and Elphaal.
And the sons of Elphaal were Heber, and Misaam, and Samad: who
built Ono, and Lod, and its daughters.
And Baria, and Sama were heads of their kindreds that dwelt in
And Ahio, and Sesac, and Jerimoth,
And Zabadia, and Arod, and Heder,
And Michael, and Jespha, and Joha, the sons of Baria.
And Zabadia, and Mosollam, Hezeci, and Heber,
And Jesamari, and Jezlia, and Jobab, sons of Elphaal,
And Jacim, and Zechri, and Zabdi,
And Elioenai, and Selethai, and Elial,
And Adaia, and Baraia, and Samareth, the sons of Semei.
And Jespham, and Heber, and Eliel,
And Abdon, and Zechri, and Hanan,
And Hanania, and Elam, and Anathothia.
And Jephdaia, and Phanuel the sons of Sesac.
And Samsari, and Sohoria and Otholia,
And Jersia, and Elia, and Zechri, the sons of Jeroham.
These were the chief fathers, and heads of their families who
dwelt in Jerusalem.
And at Gabaon dwelt Abigabaon, and the name of his wife was
And his firstborn son Abdon, and Sur, and Cis, and Baal, and
And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher, and Macelloth:
And Macelloth begot Samaa: and they dwelt over against their
brethren in Jerusalem with their brethren.
And Ner begot Cis and Cis begot Saul. And Saul begot Jonathan and
And the son of Jonathan was Meribbaal: and Meribbaal begot Micha.
And the sons of Micha were Phithon, and Melech, and Tharaa, and
And Ahaz begot Joada: and Joada begot Alamath, and Azmoth, and
And Mosa begot Banaa, whose son was Rapha, of whom was born Elasa,
who begot Asel.
And Asel had six sons whose names were Ezricam, Bochru, Ismahel,
And the sons of Esec, his brother, were Ulam the firstborn, and
And the sons of Ulam were most valiant men, and archers of great
strength: and they had many sons and grandsons, even to a hundred and
fifty. All these were children of Benjamin.
the captivity. A repetition of the genealogy of Saul.
And all Israel was numbered: and the sum of them was written in the
book of the kings of Israel, and Juda: and they were carried away to
Now the first that dwelt in their possessions, and in their cities,
were the Israelites, and the priests, and the Levites, and the
was to bring wood, water, etc., for the service of the temple.
And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Juda, and of the children
of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and of Manasses.
Othei the son of Ammiud, the son of Amri, the son of Omrai, the son
of Bonni of the sons of Phares the son of Juda.
And of Siloni: Asaia the firstborn, and his sons.
And of the sons of Zara: Jehuel and their brethren, six hundred and
ninety.
And of the sons of Benjamin: Salo the son of Mosollam, the son of
And Jobania the son of Jeroham: and Ela the son of Ozi, the son of
And their brethren by their families, nine hundred and fifty-six.
And of the priests: Jedaia, Joiarib, and Jachin:
And Azarias the son of Helcias, the son of Mosollam, the son of
of God.
And Adaias the son of Jeroham, the son of Phassur, the son of
And their brethren heads in their families a thousand seven
hundred and threescore, very strong and able men for the work of the
ministry in the house of God.
And of the Levites: Semeia the son of Hassub the son of Ezricam,
the son of Hasebia of the sons of Merari.
And Bacbacar the carpenter, and Galal, and Mathania the son of
And Obdia the son of Semeia, the son of Galal, the son of Idithum:
and Barachia the son of Asa, the son of Elcana, who dwelt in the suburbs
of Netophati.
And the porters were Sellum, and Accub, and Telmon, and Ahiman:
and their brother Sellum was the prince,
Until that time, in the king's gate eastward, the sons of Levi
waited by their turns.
But Sellum the son of Core, the son of Abiasaph, the son of Core,
with his brethren and his father's house, the Corites were over the
works of the service, keepers of the gates of the tabernacle: and their
families in turns were keepers of the entrance of the camp of the Lord.
And Phinees the son of Eleazar, was their prince before the Lord,
And Zacharias the son of Mosollamia, was porter of the gate of the
tabernacle of the testimony:
All these that were chosen to be porters at the gates, were two
hundred and twelve: the they were registered in their proper towns: whom
As well them as their sons, to keep the gates of the house of the
In four quarters were the porters: that is to say, toward the
east, and west, and north, and south.
And their brethren dwelt in village, and came upon their sabbath
days from time to time.
To these four Levites were committed the whole number of the
porters, and they were over the chambers, and treasures, of the house of
the Lord.
And they abode in their watches round about the temple of the
And some of their stock had the charge of the vessels for the
ministry: for the vessels were both brought in and carried out by
number.
Some of them also had the instruments of the sanctuary committed
unto them, and the charge of the fine flour, and wine, and oil, and
frankincense, and spices.
And the sons of the priests made the ointments of the spices.
And Mathathias a Levite, the firstborn of Sellum the Corite, was
overseer of such things as were fried the fryingpan.
And some of the sons of Caath their brethren, were over the loaves
of proposition, to prepare always new for every sabbath.
These are the chief of the singing men of the families of the
continually day and night in their ministry.
The heads of the Levites, princes in their families, abode in
And in Gabaon dwelt Jehiel the father of Gabaon, and the name of
his wife was Maacha:
His firstborn son Abdon, and Sur, and Cis, and Baal, and Ner, and
Gedor also, and Ahio, and Zacharias, and Macelloth.
And Macelloth begot Samaan: these dwelt over against their
brethren in Jerusalem, with their brethren.
Now Ner begot Cis: and Cis begot Saul: and Saul begot Jonathan and
And the son of Jonathan, was Meribbaal: and Meribbaal begot Micha.
And the sons of Micha, were Phithon, and Melech, and Tharaa, and
And Ahaz begot Jara, and Jara begot Alamath, and Azmoth, and
And Mosa begot Banaa: whose son Raphaia begot Elasa: of whom was
born Asel.
And Asel had six sons whose names are, Ezricam Bochru, Ismahel,
Now the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel
fled from before the Philistines, and fell down wounded in mount Gelboe.
And the Philistines drew near pursuing after Saul, and his sons,
and they killed Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchisua the sons of Saul.
And the battle grew hard against Saul and the archers reached him,
and wounded him with arrows.
And Saul said to his armourbearer: Draw thy sword, and kill me:
lest these uncircumcised come, and mock me. But his armourbearer would
not, for he was struck with fear: so Saul took his sword, and fell upon
it.
And when his armourbearer saw it, to wit, that Saul was dead, he
also fell upon his sword and died.
So Saul died, and his three sons, and all his house fell together.
And when the men of Israel, that dwelt in the plains, saw this,
they fled: and Saul and his sons being dead, they forsook their cities,
and were scattered up and down: and the Philistines came, and dwelt in
them.
And the next day the Philistines taking away the spoils of them
that were slain, found Saul and his sons lying on mount Gelboe.
And when they had stripped him, and cut off his head, and taken
away his armour, they sent it into their land, to be carried about, and
shewn in the temples of the idols and to the people.
And his armour they dedicated in the temple of their god, and his
head they fastened up in the temple of Dagon.
And when the men of Jabes Galaad had heard this, to wit, all that
the Philistines had done to Saul,
All the valiant men of them arose, and took the bodies of Saul
and of his sons, and brought them to Jabes, and buried their bones under
the oak that was in Jabes, and they fasted seven days.
So Saul died for his iniquities, because he transgressed the
commandment of the Lord, which he had commanded, and kept it not: and
moreover consulted also a witch,
And trusted not in the Lord: therefore he slew him, and
transferred his kingdom to David the son of Isai.
valiant men.
Then all Israel gathered themselves to David in Hebron, saying: We
are thy bone, and thy flesh.
Yesterday also, and the day before when Saul was king, thou wast
he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: for the Lord thy God said
to thee: Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over
them.
So all the ancients of Israel came to the king to Hebron, and
king over Israel according to the word of the Lord which he spoke in the
hand of Samuel.
And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus, where
the Jebusites were the inhabitants of the land.
And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David: Thou shalt not come in
here. But David took the castle of Sion, which is the city of David.
And he said: Whosoever shall first strike the Jebusites, shall be
the head and chief captain. And Joab the son of Sarvia went up first,
and was made the general.
And David dwelt in the castle, and therefore it was called the
city of David,
And he built the city round about from Mello all round, and Joab
built the rest of the city.
And David went on growing and increasing, and the Lord of hosts
was with him.
These are the chief of the valiant man of David, who helped him
to be made king over all Israel, according to the word of the Lord,
which he spoke to Israel.
And this is the number of the heroes of David: Jesbaam the son of
three hundred wounded by him at one time.
And after him was Eleazar his uncle's son the Ahohite, who was
one of the three mighties.
He was with David in Phesdomim, when the Philistines were
gathered to that place to battle: and the field of that country was full
of barley, and the people fled from before the Philistines.
But these men stood in the midst of the field, and defended it:
and they slew the Philistines, and the Lord gave a great deliverance to
his people.
And three of the thirty captains went down to the rock, wherein
valley of Raphaim.
And David was in a hold, and the garrison of the Philistines in
And David longed, and said: O that some man would give me water
of the cistern of Bethlehem, which is in the gate.
And these three broke through the midst of the camp of the
in the gate, and brought it to David to drink: and he would not drink of
it, but rather offered it to the Lord,
Saying: God forbid that I should do this in the sight of my God,
and should drink the blood of these men: for with the danger of their
lives they have brought me the water. And therefore he would not drink.
And Abisai the brother of Joab, he was chief of three, and he
lifted up his spear against three hundred whom he slew, and he was
renowned among the three,
And illustrious among the second three, and their captain: but
yet he attained not to the first three.
Banaias the son of Joiada a most valiant man, of Cabseel, who had
done many acts: he slew the two ariels of Moab: and he went down, and
killed a lion in the midst of a pit in the time of snow.
signifies a lion.
And he slew an Egyptian, whose stature was of five cubits, and
who had a spear like a weaver's beam: and he went down to him with a
staff, and plucked away the spear, that he held in his hand, and slew
him with his own spear.
These things did Banaias the son of Joiada, who was renowned
among the three valiant ones,
And the first among the thirty, but yet to the three he attained
not: and David made him of his council.
Moreover the most valiant men of the army, were Asahel brother of
Sammoth an Arorite, Helles a Phalonite,
Ira the son of Acces a Thecuite, Abiezer an Anathothite,
Sobbochai a Husathite, Ilai an Ahohite,
Maharai a Netophathite, Heled the son of Baana a Netophathite,
Ethai the son of Ribai of Gabaath of the sons of Benjamin, Banai
a Pharathonite,
Hurai of the torrent Gaas, Abiel an Arbathite, Azmoth a
The sons of Assem a Gezonite, Jonathan the son of Sage an
Ahiam the son of Sachar an Ararite,
Eliphal the son of Ur,
Hepher a Mecherathite, Ahia a Phelonite,
Hesro a Carmelite, Naarai the son of Azbai,
Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibahar the son of Agarai.
Selec an Ammonite, Naharai a Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab
the son of Sarvia.
Ira a Jethrite, Gareb a Jethrite,
Urias a Hethite, Zabad the son of Oholi,
Adina the son of Siza a Rubenite the prince of the Rubenites, and
thirty with him:
Hanan the son of Maacha, and Josaphat a Mathanite,
Ozia an Astarothite, Samma, and Jehiel the sons of Hotham an
Jedihel the son of Zamri, and Joha his brother a Thosaite,
Eliel a Mahumite, and Jeribai, and Josaia the sons of Elnaim, and
make him king.
Now these are they that came to David to Siceleg, while he yet
fled from Saul the son of Cis, and they were most valiant and excellent
warriors,
Bending the bow, and using either hand in hurling stones with
slings, and shooting arrows: of the brethren of Saul of Benjamin.
The chief was Ahiezer, and Joas, the sons of Samoa of Gabaath, and
And Samaias of Gabaon, the stoutest amongst the thirty and over
the thirty; Jeremias, and Jeheziel and Johanan, and Jozabad of Gaderoth;
And Eluzai, and Jerimuth, and Baalia, and Samaria, and Saphatia
the Haruphite;
Elcana, and Jesia, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jesbaam of
And Joela, and Zabadia the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.
From Gaddi also there went over to David, when he lay hid in the
wilderness most valiant men, and excellent warriors, holding shield and
spear: whose faces were like the faces of a lion, and they were swift
like the roebucks on the mountains.
Ezer the chief, Obdias the second, Eliab the third,
Masmana the fourth, Jeremias the fifth,
Ethi the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
Johanan the eighth, Elzebad the ninth,
Jerenias the tenth, Machbani the eleventh,
These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the army: the least of
them was captain over a hundred soldiers, and the greatest over a
thousand.
These are they who passed over the Jordan in the first month,
when it is used to flow over its banks: and they put to flight all that
dwelt in the valleys both toward the east and toward the west.
And there came also of the men of Benjamin, and of Juda to the
hold, in which David abode.
And David went out to meet them, and said: If you are come
peaceably to me to help me, let my heart be joined to you: but if you
plot against me for my enemies whereas I have no iniquity in my hands,
let the God of our fathers see, and judge.
But the spirit came upon Amasai the chief among thirty, and he
said: We are thine, O David, and for thee, O son of Isai: peace, peace
be to thee, and peace to thy helpers. For thy God helpeth thee. So David
received them, and made them captains of the band.
And there were some of Manasses that went over to David, when he
came with the Philistines against Saul to fight: but he did not fight
with them: because the lords of the Philistines taking counsel sent him
back, saying: With the danger of our heads he will return to his master
So when he went back to Siceleg, there fled to him of Manasses,
These helped David against the rovers: for they were all most
valiant men, and were made commanders in the army.
Moreover day by day there came some to David to help him till
they became a great number, like the army of God.
And this is the number of the chiefs of the army who came to
according to the word of the Lord.
The sons of Juda bearing shield and spear, six thousand eight
hundred well appointed to war.
Of the sons of Simeon valiant men for war, seven thousand one
hundred.
Of the sons of Levi, four thousand six hundred.
And Joiada prince of the race of Aaron, and with him three
thousand seven hundred.
Sadoc also a young man of excellent disposition, and the house of
his father, twenty-two principal men.
And of the sons of Benjamin the brethren of Saul, three thousand:
for hitherto a great part of them followed the house of Saul.
And of the sons of Ephraim twenty thousand eight hundred, men of
great valour renowned in their kindreds.
And of the half tribe of Manasses, eighteen thousand, every one
by their names, came to make David king.
Also of the sons of Issachar men of understanding, that knew all
times to order what Israel should do, two hundred principal men: and all
the rest of the tribe followed their counsel.
And of Zabulon such as went forth to battle, and stood in array
well appointed with armour for war, there came fifty thousand to his
aid, with no double heart.
And of Nephtali, a thousand leaders: and with them seven and
thirty thousand, furnished with shield and spear.
Of Dan also twenty-eight thousand six hundred prepared for
battle.
And of Aser forty thousand going forth to fight, and challenging
in battle.
And on the other side of the Jordan of the sons of Ruben, and of
thousand, furnished with arms for war.
All these men of war well appointed to fight, came with a perfect
heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest
also of Israel, were of one heart to make David king.
And they were there with David three days eating and drinking:
for their brethren had prepared for them.
Moreover they that were near them even as far as Issachar, and
mules, and on oxen, to eat: meal, figs, raisins, wine, oil, and oxen,
and sheep in abundance, for there was joy in Israel.
dead.
David consulted with the captains of thousands, and of hundreds,
and with all the commanders.
And he said to all the assembly of Israel: If it please you; and
if the words which I speak come from the Lord our God, let us send to
the rest of our brethren into all the countries of Israel, and to the
priests, and the Levites, that dwell in the suburbs of the cities, to
gather themselves to us,
And let us bring again the ark of our God to us: for we sought it
not in the days of Saul.
And all the multitude answered that it should be so: for the word
pleased all the people.
So David assembled all Israel from Sihor of Egypt, even to the
entering into Emath, to bring the ark of God from Cariathiarim.
And David went up with all the men of Israel to the hill of
sitting upon the cherubims, where his name is called upon.
And they carried the ark of God upon a new cart out of the house
of Abinadab. And Oza and his brother drove the cart.
And David and all Israel played before God with all their might
with hymns, and with harps, and with psalteries, and timbrels, and
cymbals, and trumpets,
And when they came to the floor of Chidon, Oza put forth his hand,
to hold up the ark: for the ox being wanton had made it lean a little on
one side.
And the Lord was angry with Oza, and struck him, because he had
touched the ark; and he died there before the Lord.
And David was troubled because the Lord had divided Oza: and he
called that place the Breach of Oza to this day.
And he feared God at that time, saying: How can I bring in the
ark of God to me?
And therefore he brought it not home to himself, that is, into
the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obededom the
And the ark of God remained in the house of Obededom three
months: and the Lord blessed his house, and all that he had.
And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees,
and masons, and carpenters, to build him a house.
And David perceived that the Lord had confirmed him king over
And David took other wives in Jerusalem: and he begot sons, and
daughters.
Now these are the names of them that were born to him in
Jebahar, and Elisua, and Eliphalet,
And Noga, and Napheg, and Japhia,
Elisama, and Baaliada, and Eliphalet.
And the Philistines hearing that David was anointed king over all
against them.
And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the vale of
And David consulted the Lord, saying: Shall I go up against the
to him: Go up, and I will deliver them into thy hand.
And when they were come to Baalpharasim, David defeated them
there, and he said: God hath divided my enemies by my hand, as waters
are divided: and therefore the name of that place was called
And they left there their gods, and David commanded that they
should be burnt.
Another time also the Philistines made an irruption, and spread
themselves abroad in the valley.
And David consulted God again, and God said to him: Go not up
after them, turn away from them, and come upon them over against the
pear trees.
And when thou shalt hear the sound of one going in the tops of
the pear trees, then shalt thou go out to battle. For God is gone out
before thee to strike the army of the Philistines.
And David did as God had commanded him, and defeated the army of
the Philistines, slaying them from Gabaon to Gazera.
And the name of David became famous in all countries, and the
derideth David's devotion.
He made also houses for himself in the city of David: and built a
place for the ark of God, and pitched a tabernacle for it.
Then David said: No one ought to carry the ark of God, but the
himself for ever.
And he gathered all Israel together into Jerusalem, that the ark
of God might be brought into its place, which he had prepared for it.
And the sons of Aaron also, and the Levites.
Of the children of Caath, Uriel was the chief, and his brethren a
hundred and twenty.
Of the sons of Merari, Asaia the chief, and his brethren two
hundred and twenty.
Of the sons of Gersom, Joel the chief, and his brethren a hundred
and thirty.
Of the sons of Elisaphan, Semeias the chief: and his brethren two
hundred.
Of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief: and his brethren eighty.
Of the sons of Oziel, Aminadab the chief: and his brethren a
hundred and twelve.
And David called Sadoc, and Abiathar the priests, and the
And he said to them: You that are the heads of the Levitical
families, be sanctified with your brethren, and bring the ark of the
Lest as the Lord at first struck us, because you were not
present, the same should now also come to pass, by our doing some thing
against the law.
So the priests and the Levites were sanctified, to carry the ark
of the Lord the God of Israel.
And the sons of Levi took the ark of God as Moses had commanded,
according to the word of the Lord, upon their shoulders, with the
staves.
And David spoke to the chiefs of the Levites, to appoint some of
their brethren to be singers with musical instruments, to wit, on
psalteries, and harps, and cymbals, that the joyful noise might resound
on high.
And they appointed Levites, Hemam the son of Joel, and of his
brethren Asaph the son of Barachias: and of the sons of Merari, their
brethren: Ethan the son of Casaia.
And with them their brethren: in the second rank, Zacharias, and
Now the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, sounded with cymbals of
brass.
And Zacharias, and Oziel, and Semiramoth, and Jehiel, and Ani,
and Eliab, and Maasias, and Banaias, sung mysteries upon psalteries.
And Mathathias, and Eliphalu, and Macenias and Obededom, and
And Chonenias chief of the Levites, presided over the prophecy,
to give out the tunes: for he was very skilful.
called prophecy: the more, because these singers were often inspired
men.
And Barachias, and Elcana, were doorkeepers of the ark.
And Sebenias, and Josaphat, and Nathanael, and Amasai, and
before the ark of God: and Obededom and Jehias were porters of the ark.
So David and all the ancients of Israel, and the captains over
thousands, went to bring the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the
house of Obededom with joy.
And when God had helped the Levites who carried the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, they offered in sacrifice seven oxen, and seven
rams.
And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the
ruler of the prophecy among the singers: and David also had on him an
ephod of linen.
And all Israel brought the ark of the covenant of the Lord with
joyful shouting, and sounding with the sound of the cornet, and with
trumpets, and cymbals, and psalteries, and harps.
And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord was come to the city
of David, Michol the daughter of Saul looking out at a window, saw king
blesseth the people, disposeth the offices of Levites, and maketh a
psalm of praise to God.
So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the
tent, which David had pitched for it: and they offered holocausts, and
peace offerings before God.
And when David had made an end of offering holocausts, and peace
offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord.
And he divided to all and every one, both men and women, a loaf of
bread, and a piece of roasted beef, and flour fried with oil.
And he appointed Levites to minister before the ark of the Lord,
and to remember his works, and to glorify, and praise the Lord God of
Asaph the chief, and next after him Zacharias: moreover Jahiel,
and Semiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mathathias, and Eliab, and Banaias, and
But Banaias, and Jaziel the priests, to sound the trumpet
continually before the ark of the covenant of the Lord.
In that day David made Asaph the chief to give praise to the Lord
with his brethren.
Praise ye the Lord, and call upon his name: make known his doings
among the nations.
Sing to him, yea, sing praises to him: and relate all his wondrous
works.
Praise ye his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice, that seek
the Lord.
Seek ye the Lord, and his power: seek ye his face evermore.
Remember his wonderful works, which he hath done: his signs, and
the judgments of his mouth.
O ye seed of Israel his servants, ye children of Jacob his
chosen.
He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the earth.
Remember for ever his covenant: the word, which he commanded to a
thousand generations.
The covenant which he made with Abraham: and his oath to Isaac.
And he appointed the same to Jacob for a precept: and to Israel
for an everlasting covenant:
Saying: To thee will I give the land of Chanaan: the lot of your
inheritance.
When they were but a small number: very few and sojourners in it.
And they passed from nation to nation: and from a kingdom to
another people.
He suffered no man to do them wrong: and reproved kings for their
sake.
Touch not my anointed: and do no evil to my prophets.
Sing ye to the Lord, all the earth: shew forth from day to day
his salvation.
Declare his glory among the Gentiles: his wonders among all
people.
For the Lord is great and exceedingly to be praised: and he is to
be feared above all gods.
For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the
heavens.
Praise and magnificence are before him: strength and joy in his
place.
Bring ye to the Lord, O ye families of the nations: bring ye to
the Lord glory and empire.
Give to the Lord glory to his name, bring up sacrifice, and come
ye in his sight: and adore the Lord in holy becomingness.
Let all the earth be moved at his presence: for he hath founded
the world immoveable.
Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad: and let them say
among the nations: The Lord hath reigned.
Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof: let the fields
rejoice, and all things that are in them.
Then shall the trees of the wood give praise before the Lord:
because he is come to judge the earth.
Give ye glory to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth
for ever.
And say ye: Save us, O God our savior: and gather us together,
and deliver us from the nations, that we may give glory to thy holy
name, and may rejoice in singing thy praises.
Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel from eternity to eternity:
and let all the people say Amen, and a hymn to God.
So he left there before the ark of the covenant of the Lord,
continually day by day, and in their courses.
And Obededom, with his brethren sixty-eight: and Obededom the son
of Idithun, and Hosa he appointed to be porters.
And Sadoc the priest, and his brethren priests, before the
tabernacle of the Lord in the high place, which was in Gabaon.
That they should offer holocausts to the Lord upon the altar of
holocausts continually, morning and evening, according to all that is
written in the law of the Lord, which he commanded Israel.
And after him Heman, and Idithun, and the rest that were chosen,
every one by his name to give praise to the Lord: because his mercy
endureth for ever.
And Heman and Idithun sounded the trumpet, and played on the
cymbals, and all kinds of musical instruments to sing praises to God:
and the sons of Idithun he made porters.
And all the people returned to their houses: and David to bless
also his own house.
Now when David was dwelling in his house, he said to Nathan the
prophet: Behold I dwell in a house of cedar: and the ark of the covenant
of the Lord is under skins.
And Nathan said to David: Do all that is in thy heart: for God is
with thee.
Now that night the word of God came to Nathan, saying:
Go, and speak to David my servant: Thus saith the Lord: Thou shalt
not build me a house to dwell in.
For I have not remained in a house from the time that I brought up
tabernacle, and in a tent,
Abiding with all Israel. Did I ever speak to any one, of all the
judges of Israel whom I charged to feed my people, saying: Why have you
not built me a house of cedar?
Now therefore thus shalt thou say to my servant David: Thus saith
the Lord of hosts: I took thee from the pastures, from following the
flock, that thou shouldst be ruler of my people Israel.
And I have been with thee whithersoever thou hast gone: and have
slain all thy enemies before thee, and have made thee a name like that
of one of the great ones that are renowned in the earth.
And I have given a place my people Israel: they shall be planted,
and shall dwell therein, and shall be moved no more, neither shall the
children of iniquity waste them, as at the beginning,
Since the days that I gave judges to my people Israel, and have
humbled all thy enemies. And I declare to thee, that the Lord will build
thee a house.
And when thou shalt have ended thy days to go to thy fathers, I
will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons: and I
will establish his kingdom.
He shall build me a house, and I will establish his throne for
ever.
I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son: and I
will not take my mercy away from him, as I took it from him that was
before thee.
But I will settle him in my house, and in my kingdom for ever:
and his throne shall be most firm for ever.
According to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did Nathan speak to David.
And king David came and sat before the Lord, and said: Who am I,
me?
But even this hath seemed little in thy sight, and therefore thou
hast also spoken concerning the house of thy servant for the time to
come: and hast made me remarkable above all men, O Lord God.
What can David add more, seeing thou hast thus glorified thy
servant, and known him?
O Lord, for thy servant's sake, according to thy own heart, thou
hast shewn all this magnificence, and wouldst have all the great things
to be known.
O Lord there is none like thee: and here is no other God beside
thee, of all whom we have heard of with our ears.
For what other nation is there upon earth like thy people Israel,
whom God went to deliver, and make a people for himself, and by his
greatness and terrors cast out nations before their face whom he had
delivered out of Egypt?
And thou hast made thy people Israel to be thy own people for
ever, and thou, O Lord, art become their God.
Now therefore, O Lord, let the word which thou hast spoken to thy
servant, and concerning his house, be established for ever, and do as
thou hast said.
And let thy name remain and be magnified for ever: and let it be
said: The Lord of hosts is God of Israel, and the house of David his
servant remaineth before him.
For thou, O Lord my God, hast revealed to the ear of thy servant,
that thou wilt build him a house: and therefore thy servant hath found
confidence to pray before thee.
And now O Lord, thou art God: and thou hast promised to thy
servant such great benefits.
And thou hast begun to bless the house of thy servant, that it
may be always before thee: for seeing thou blessest it, O Lord, it shall
be blessed for ever.
And it came to pass after this, that David defeated the
of the hands of the Philistines,
And he defeated Moab, and the Moabites were made David's servants,
and brought him gifts.
At that time David defeated also Adarezer king of Soba of the land
of Hemath, when he went to extend his dominions as far as the river
And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand
horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen, and he houghed all the chariot
horses, only a hundred chariots, which he reserved for himself.
And the Syrians of Damascus came also to help Adarezer king of
And he put a garrison in Damascus, that Syria also should serve
him, and bring gifts. And the Lord assisted him in all things to which
he went.
And David took the golden quivers which the servants of Adarezer
had, and he brought them to Jerusalem.
Likewise out of Thebath and Chun, cities of Adarezer, he brought
very much brass, of which Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars,
and the vessels of brass.
Now when Thou king of Hemath heard that David had defeated all the
army of Adarezer king of Soba,
He sent Adoram his son to king David to desire peace of him, and
to congratulate him that he had defeated and overthrown Adarezer: for
And all the vessels of gold, and silver and brass king David
consecrated to the Lord, with the silver and gold which he had taken
from all the nations, as well from Edom, and from Moab, and from the
sons of Ammon, as from the Philistines, and from Amalec.
And Abisai the son of Sarvia slew of the Edomites in the vale of
the saltpits, eighteen thousand:
And he put a garrison in Edom, that Edom should serve David: and
the Lord preserved David in all things to which he went.
So David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and
justice among all his people.
And Joab the son of Sarvia was over the army, and Josaphat the
son of Ahilud recorder.
And Sadoc the son of Achitob, and Achimelech the son of Abiathar,
were the priests: and Susa, scribe.
And Banaias the son of Joiada was over the bands of the Cerethi,
and the Phelethi: and the sons of David were chief about the king.
confederates are overthrown.
Now it came to pass that Naas the king of the children of Ammon
died, and his son reigned in his stead.
And David said: I will shew kindness to Hanon the son of Naas: for
his father did a favour to me. And David sent messengers to comfort him
upon the death of his father. But when they were come into the land of
the children of Ammon, to comfort Hanon,
The princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanon: Thou thinkest
perhaps that David to do honour to thy father hath sent comforters to
thee: and thou dost not take notice, that his servants are come to thee
to consider, and search, and spy out thy land.
Wherefore Hanon shaved the heads and beards of the servants of
sent them away.
And when they were gone, they sent word to David, who sent to meet
them (for they had suffered a great affront) and ordered them to stay at
And when the children of Ammon saw that they had done an injury to
silver, to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia and out of
And they hired two and thirty thousand chariots, and the king of
cities, and came to battle.
And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the army of
valiant men:
And the children of Ammon came out and put their army in array
before the gate of the city: and the kings, that were come to their aid,
stood apart in the field.
Wherefore Joab understanding that the battle was set against him
before and behind, chose out the bravest men of all Israel, and marched
against the Syrians,
And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abisai
his brother, and they went against the children of Ammon.
And he said: If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt
help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, I will
help thee.
Be of good courage and let us behave ourselves manfully for our
people, and for the cities of our God: and the Lord will do that which
is good in his sight.
So Joab and the people that were with him, went against the
And the children of Ammon seeing that the Syrians were fled, they
likewise fled from Abisai his brother, and went into the city: and Joab
also returned to Jerusalem.
But the Syrians seeing that they had fallen before Israel, sent
messengers, and brought to them the Syrians that were beyond the river:
and Sophach, general of the army of Adarezer, was their leader.
And it was told David, and he gathered together all Israel, and
passed the Jordan, and came upon them, and put his army in array against
them, and they fought with him.
But the Syrian fled before Israel: and David slew of the Syrians
seven thousand chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and Sophach the
general of the army.
And when the servants of Adarezer saw themselves overcome by
help the children of Ammon any more.
And it came to pass after the course of a year, at the time that
kings go out to battle, Joab gathered together an army and the strength
of the troops, and wasted the land of the children of Ammon: and went
and besieged Rabba. But David stayed at Jerusalem, when Joab smote
And David took the crown of Melchom from his head, and found in it
a talent weight of gold, and most precious stones, and he made himself a
diadem of it: he took also the spoils of the city which were very great.
And the people that were therein he brought out: and made harrows,
and sleds, and chariots of iron to go over them, so that they were cut
and bruised to pieces: in this manner David dealt with all the cities of
the children of Ammon: and he returned with all his people to Jerusalem.
After this there arose a war at Gazer against the Philistines: in
which Sabachai the Husathite slew Saphai of the race of Raphaim, and
humbled them.
Another battle also was fought against the Philistines, in which
the Gethite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
There was another battle also in Geth, in which there was a man of
great stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on each
hand and foot: who also was born of the stock of Rapha.
He reviled Israel: but Jonathan the son of Samaa the brother of
hand of David and his servants.
ceaseth upon his offering sacrifice in the thrashingfloor of Ornan.
And Satan rose up against Israel: and moved David to number
And David said to Joab, and to the rulers of the people: Go, and
number Israel from Bersabee even to Dan, and bring me the number of them
that I may know it.
And Joab answered: The Lord make his people a hundred times more
than they are: but, my lord the king, are they not all thy servants: why
doth my lord seek this thing, which may be imputed as a sin to Israel?
But the king's word rather prevailed: and Joab departed, and went
through all Israel: and returned to Jerusalem.
And he gave David the number of them, whom he had surveyed: and
all the number of Israel was found to be eleven hundred thousand men
that drew the sword: and of Juda four hundred and seventy thousand
fighting men.
to be accounted for, by supposing the greater number to be that which
was really found, and the lesser to be that which Joab gave in.
But Levi and Benjamin he did not number: for Joab unwillingly
executed the king's orders.
And God was displeased with this thing that was commanded: and he
struck Israel.
And David said to God: I have sinned exceedingly in doing this: I
beseech thee take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done
foolishly.
And the Lord spoke to Gad the seer of David, saying:
Go, and speak to David, and tell him: Thus saith the Lord: I give
thee the choice of three things: choose one which thou wilt, and I will
do it to thee.
And when Gad was come to David, he said to him: Thus saith the
Either three years famine: or three months to flee from thy
enemies, and not to be able to escape their sword: or three days to have
the sword of the Lord, and pestilence in the land, and the angel of the
shall answer him who sent me.
famine mentioned, 2 Kings 21. and the seventh year of the land's
resting, would make up the seven years proposed by the prophet, 2 Kings
24.13.
And David said to Gad: I am on every side in a great strait: but
it is better for me to fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies
are many, than into the hands of men.
So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel. And there fell of
And he sent an angel to Jerusalem, to strike it: and as he was
striking it, the Lord beheld, and took pity for the greatness of the
evil: and said to the angel that destroyed: It is enough, now stop thy
hand. And the angel of the Lord stood by the thrashingfloor of Ornan the
And David lifting up his eyes, saw the angel of the Lord standing
between heaven and earth, with a drawn sword in his hand, turned against
flat on the ground.
And David said to God: Am not I he that commanded the people to
be numbered? It is I that have sinned: it is I that have done the evil:
but as for this flock, what hath it deserved? O Lord my God, let thy
hand be turned, I beseech thee, upon me, and upon my father's house: and
let not thy people be destroyed.
And the angel of the Lord commanded Gad to tell David, to go up,
and build an altar to the Lord God in the thrashingfloor of Ornan the
And David went up, according to the word of Gad, which he spoke
to him in the name of the Lord.
Now when Ornan looked up, and saw the angel, he and his four sons
hid themselves: for at that time he was thrashing wheat in the floor.
And as David was coming to Ornan, Ornan saw him, and went out of
the thrashingfloor to meet him, and bowed down to him with his face to
the ground.
And David said to him: Give me this place of thy thrashingfloor,
that I may build therein an altar to the Lord: but thou shalt take of me
as much money as it is worth, that the plague may cease from the people.
And Ornan said to David: Take it, and let my lord the king do all
that pleaseth him: and moreover the oxen also I give for a holocaust,
and the drays for wood, and the wheat for the sacrifice: I will give it
all willingly.
And king David said to him: It shall not be so, but I will give
thee money as much as it is worth: for I must not take it from thee, and
so offer to the Lord holocausts free cost.
So David gave to Ornan for the place, six hundred sicles of gold
of just weight.
which the temple was afterwards built; but the price of the oxen was
fifty sicles of silver. 2 Kings 24.24.
And he built there an altar to the Lord: and he offered
holocausts, and peace offerings, and he called upon the Lord, and he
heard him by sending fire from heaven upon the altar of the holocaust.
And the Lord commanded the angel: and he put up his sword again
into the sheath.
And David seeing that the Lord had heard him in the
thrashingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite, forthwith offered victims there.
But the tabernacle of the Lord, which Moses made in the desert,
and the altar of holocausts, was at that time in the high place of
And David could not go to the altar there to pray to God: for he
was seized with an exceeding great fear, seeing the sword of the angel
of the Lord.
temple and the princes to assist him.
Then David said: This is the house of God, And this is the altar
for the holocaust of Israel.
And he commanded to gather together all the proselytes of the land
of Israel, and out of them he appointed stonecutters to hew stones and
polish them, to build the house of God.
And David prepared in abundance iron for the nails of the gates,
and for the closures and joinings: and of brass an immense weight.
And the cedar trees were without number, which the Sidonians, and
And David said: Solomon my son is very young and tender, and the
house which I would have to be built to the Lord, must be such as to be
renowned in all countries: therefore I will prepare him necessaries. And
therefore before his death he prepared all the charges.
And he called for Solomon his son: and commanded him to build a
house to the Lord the God of Israel.
And David said to Solomon: My son, it was my desire to have built
a house to the name of the Lord my God.
But the word of the Lord came to me, saying: Thou hast shed much
blood, and fought many battles, so thou canst not build house to my
name, after shedding so much blood before me:
The son, that shall be born to thee, shall be a most quiet man:
for I will make him rest from all his enemies round about: and therefore
he shall be called Peaceable: and I will give peace and quietness to
He shall build a house to my name, and he shall be a son to me,
and I will be a father to him: and I will establish the throne of his
kingdom over Israel for ever.
Now then, my son, the Lord be with thee, and do thou prosper, and
build the house to the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken of thee.
The Lord also give thee wisdom and understanding, that thou
mayest be able to rule Israel, and to keep the law of the Lord thy God.
For then thou shalt be able to prosper, if thou keep the
commandments, and judgments, which the Lord commanded Moses to teach
Behold I in my poverty have prepared the charges of the house of
the Lord, of gold a hundred thousand talents, and of silver a million of
talents: but of brass, and of iron there is no weight, for the abundance
surpasseth all account: timber also and stones I have prepared for all
the charges.
Thou hast also workmen in abundance, hewers of stones, and
masons, and carpenters, and of all trades the most skilful in their
work,
In gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, whereof there
is no number. Arise then, and be doing, and the Lord will be with thee.
David also charged all the princes of Israel, to help Solomon his
son,
Saying: You see, that the Lord your God is with you, and hath
given you rest round about, and hath delivered all your enemies into
your hands, and the land is subdued before the Lord, and before his
people.
Give therefore your hearts and your souls, to seek the Lord your
the covenant of the Lord, and the vessels consecrated to the Lord, may
be brought into the house, which is built to the name of the Lord.
offices.
David being old and full of days, made Solomon his son king over
And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, and the
priests and Levites.
And the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years, and
upwards: and there were found of them thirty-eight thousand men.
Of these twenty-four thousand were chosen, and distributed unto
the ministry of the house of the Lord: and six thousand were the
overseers and judges.
Moreover four thousand were porters: and as many singers singing
to the Lord with the instruments, which he had made to sing with.
And David distributed them into courses by the families of the
sons of Levi, to wit, of Gerson, and of Caath, and of Merari.
The sons of Gerson were Leedan and Semei.
The sons of Leedan: the chief Jahiel, and Zethan, and Joel, three.
The sons of Semei: Salomith, and Hosiel, and Aran, three: these
were the heads of the families of Leedan.
And the sons of Semei were Leheth, and Ziza, and Jaus, and Baria:
these were the sons of Semei, four.
And Leheth was the first, Ziza the second: but Jaus and Baria had
not many children, and therefore they were counted in one family, and in
one house.
The sons of Caath were Amram, and Isaar, Hebron, and Oziel, four.
The sons of Amram, Aaron, and Moses. And Aaron was separated to
minister in the holy of holies, he and his sons for ever, and to burn
incense before the Lord, according to his ceremonies, and to bless his
name for ever.
The sons also of Moses, the man of God, were numbered in the
tribe of Levi.
The sons of Moses were Gersom and Eliezer:
The sons of Gersom: Subuel the first.
And the sons of Eliezer were: Rohobia the first: and Eliezer had
no more sons. But the sons of Rohobia were multiplied exceedingly.
The sons of Isaar: Salomith the first.
The sons of Hebron: Jeriau the first, Amarias the second,
The sons of Oziel: Micha the first, Jesia the second.
The sons of Merari: Moholi, and Musi. The sons of Moholi: Eleazar
and Cis.
And Eleazar died, and had no sons but daughters: and the sons of
The sons of Musi: Moholi, and Eder, and Jerimoth, three.
These are the sons of Levi in their kindreds and families,
princes by their courses, and the number of every head that did the
works of the ministry of the house of the Lord from twenty years old and
upward.
For David said: The Lord the God of Israel hath given rest to his
people, and a habitation in Jerusalem for ever.
And it shall not be the office of the Levites to carry any more
the tabernacle, and all the vessels for the service thereof.
So according to the last precepts of David, the sons of Levi are
to be numbered from twenty years old and upward.
And they are to be under the hand of the sons of Aaron for the
service of the house of the Lord, in the porches, and in the chambers,
and in the place of purification, and in the sanctuary, and in all the
works of the ministry of the temple of the Lord.
And the priests have the charge of the loaves of proposition, and
of the sacrifice of fine flour, and of the unleavened cakes, and of the
fryingpan, and of the roasting, and of every weight and measure.
And the Levites are to stand in the morning to give thanks, and
to sing praises to the Lord: and in like manner in the evening,
As well in the oblation of the holocausts of the Lord, as in the
sabbaths and in the new moons, and the rest of the solemnities,
according to the number and ceremonies prescribed for every thing,
continually before the Lord.
And let them keep the observances of the tabernacle of the
covenant, and the ceremonies of the sanctuary, and the charge of the
sons of Aaron their brethren, that they may minister in the house of the
the temple: the chiefs of the Levites.
Now these were the divisions of the sons of Aaron: The sons of
But Nadab and Abiu died before their father, and had no children:
so Eleazar, and Ithamar did the office of the priesthood.
And David distributed them, that is, Sadoc of the sons of Eleazar,
and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their courses and
ministry.
And there were found many more of the sons of Eleazar among the
principal men, than of the sons of Ithamar. And he divided them so, that
there were of the sons of Eleazar, sixteen chief men by their families:
and of the sons of Ithamar eight by their families and houses.
And he divided both the families one with the other by lot: for
there were princes of the sanctuary, and princes of God, both of the
sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.
And Semeias the son of Nathanael the scribe a Levite, wrote them
down before the king and the princes, and Sadoc the priest, and
another house, which had the rest under it, of Ithamar.
Now the first lot came forth to Joiarib, the second to Jedei,
The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
The fifth to Melchia, the sixth to Maiman,
The seventh to Accos, the eighth to Abia,
The ninth to Jesua, the tenth to Sechenia,
The eleventh to Eliasib, the twelfth to Jacim,
The thirteenth to Hoppha, the fourteenth to Isbaab,
The fifteenth to Belga, the sixteenth to Emmer,
The seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Aphses,
The nineteenth to Pheteia, the twentieth to Hezechiel,
The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul,
The three and twentieth to Dalaiau, the four and twentieth to
These are their courses according to their ministries, to come
into the house of the Lord, and according to their manner under the hand
of Aaron their father: as the Lord the God of Israel had commanded.
Now of the rest of the sons of Levi, there was of the sons of
Also of the sons of Rohobia the chief Jesias.
And the son of Isaar Salemoth, and the son of Salemoth Jahath:
And his son Jeriau the first, Amarias the second, Jahaziel the
third, Jecmaan the fourth.
The son of Oziel, Micha: the son of Micha, Samir.
The brother of Micha, Jesia: and the son of Jesia, Zacharias.
The sons of Merari: Moholi and Musi: the son of Oziau: Benno.
The son also of Merari Oziau, and Soam, and Zacchur, and Hebri.
And the son of Moholi: Eleazar, who had no sons.
And the son of Cis, Jeramael.
The sons of Musi: Moholi, Eder, and Jerimoth. These are the sons
of Levi according to the houses of their families.
And they also cast lots over against their brethren the sons of
of the priestly and Levitical families, both the elder and the younger.
Moreover David and the chief officers of the army separated for
the ministry the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Idithun: to
prophesy with harps, and with psalteries, and with cymbals according to
their number serving in their appointed office.
Of the sons of Asaph: Zacchur, and Joseph, and Nathania, and
king.
And of Idithun: the sons of Idithun, Godolias, Sori, Jeseias, and
prophesied with a harp to give thanks and to praise the Lord.
Of Heman also: the sons of Heman, Bocciau, Mathaniau, Oziel,
All these were the sons of Heman the seer of the king in the words
of God, to lift up the horn: and God gave to Heman fourteen sons and
three daughters.
All these under their father's hand were distributed to sing in
the temple of the Lord, with cymbals, and psalteries and harps, for the
service of the house of the Lord near the king: to wit, Asaph, and
And the number of them with their brethren, that taught the song
of the Lord, all the teachers, were two hundred and eighty-eight.
And they cast lots by their courses, the elder equally with the
younger, the learned and the unlearned together.
And the first lot came forth to Joseph, who was of Asaph.  The
second to Godolias, to him and his sons, and his brethren twelve.
The third to Zachur, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The fourth to Isari, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The fifth to Nathania, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The sixth to Bocciau, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The seventh to Isreela, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The eighth to Jesaia, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The ninth to Mathanaias, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The tenth to Semeias, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The eleventh to Azareel, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The twelfth to Hasabia, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The thirteenth to Subael, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The fourteenth to Mathathias, to his sons and his brethren
twelve.
The fifteenth to Jerimoth, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The sixteenth to Hananias, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The seventeenth to Jesbacassa, to his sons and his brethren
twelve.
The eighteenth to Hanani, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The nineteenth to Mellothi, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The twentieth to Eliatha, to his sons and his brethren twelve.
The one and twentieth to Othir, to his sons and his brethren
twelve.
The two and twentieth to Geddelthi, to his sons and his brethren
twelve.
The three and twentieth to Mahazioth, to his sons and his
brethren twelve.
The four and twentieth to Romemthiezer, to his sons and his
brethren twelve.
And the divisions of the porters: of the Corites Meselemia, the
son of Core, of the sons of Asaph.
The sons of Meselemia: Zacharias the firstborn, Jadihel the
second, Zabadias the third, Jathanael the fourth,
Elam the fifth, Johanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh.
And the sons of Obededom, Semeias the firstborn, Jozabad the
second, Joaha the third, Sachar the fourth, Nathanael the fifth,
Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Phollathi the eighth: for
the Lord had blessed him.
And to Semei his son were born sons, heads of their families: for
they were men of great valour.
The sons then of Semeias were Othni, and Raphael, and Obed,
All these of the sons of Obededom: they, and their sons, and their
brethren most able men for service, sixty-two of Obededom.
And the sons of Meselemia, and their brethren strong men, were
eighteen.
And of Hosa, that is, of the sons of Merari: Semri the chief,
(for he had not a firstborn, and therefore his father made him chief.)
fit to be chief; and therefore he made Semri the chief.
Helcias the second, Tabelias the third, Zacharias the fourth: all
these the sons, and the brethren of Hosa, were thirteen.
Among these were the divisions of the porters, so that the chiefs
of the wards, as well as their brethren, always ministered in the house
of the Lord.
And they cast lots equally, both little and great, by their
families for every one of the gates.
And the lot of the east fell to Selemias. But to his son
And to Obededom and his sons that towards the south: in which
part of the house was the council of the ancients.
To Sephim, and Hosa towards the west, by the gate which leadeth
to the way of the ascent: ward against ward.
Now towards the east were six Levites: and towards the north four
a day: and towards the south likewise four a day: and where the council
was, two and two.
In the cells also of the porters toward the west four in the way:
and two at every cell.
These are the divisions of the porters of the sons of Core, and
of Merari.
Now Achias was over the treasures of the house of God, and the
holy vessels.
sanctorum.
The sons of Ledan, the sons of Gersonni: of Ledan were heads of
the families, of Ledan, and Gersonni, Jehieli.
The sons of Jehieli: Zathan and Joel, his brethren over the
treasures of the house of the Lord,
With the Amramites, and Isaarites, and Hebronites, and Ozielites.
And Subael the son of Gersom, the son of Moses, was chief over
the treasures.
His brethren also, Eliezer, whose son Rohobia, and his son
Which Selemith and his brethren were over the treasures of the
holy things, which king David, and the heads of families, and the
captains over thousands and over hundreds, and the captains of the host
had dedicated,
Out of the wars, and the spoils won in battles, which they had
consecrated to the building and furniture of the temple of the Lord.
And all these things that Samuel the seer and Saul the son of
sanctified: and whosoever had sanctified those things, they were under
the hand of Selemith and his brethren.
But Chonenias and his sons were over the Isaarites, for the
business abroad over Israel to teach them and judge them.
And of the Hebronites Hasabias, and his brethren most able men, a
thousand seven hundred had the charge over Israel beyond the Jordan
westward, in all the works of the Lord, and for the service of the king.
And the chief of the Hebronites was Jeria according to their
families and kindreds. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they
were numbered, and there were found most valiant men in Jazer Galaad,
And his brethren of stronger age, two thousand seven hundred
chiefs of families. And king David made them rulers over the Rubenites
and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses, for all the service of
Now the children of Israel according to their number, the heads of
families, captains of thousands and of hundreds, and officers, that
served the king according to their companies, who came in and went out
every month in the year, under every chief were four and twenty
thousand.
Over the first company the first month Jesboam, the son of Zabdiel
was chief, and under him were four and twenty thousand.
Of the sons of Phares, the chief of all the captains in the host
in the first month.
The company of the second month was under Dudia, an Ahohite, and
after him was another named Macelloth, who commanded a part of the army
of four and twenty thousand.
And the captain of the third company for the third month, was
twenty thousand.
This is that Banaias the most valiant among the thirty, and above
the thirty. And Amizabad his son commanded his company.
The fourth, for the fourth month, was Asahel the brother of Joab,
and Zabadias his son after him: and in his company were four and twenty
thousand.
The fifth captain for the fifth month, was Samaoth a Jezerite: and
his company were four and twenty thousand.
The sixth, for the sixth month, was Hira the son of Acces a
The seventh, for the seventh month, was Helles a Phallonite of
the sons of Ephraim: and in his company were four and twenty thousand.
The eighth, for the eighth month, was Sobochai a Husathite of the
race of Zarahi: and in his company were four and twenty thousand.
The ninth, for the ninth month, was Abiezer an Anathothite of the
sons of Jemini, and in his company were four and twenty thousand.
The tenth, for the tenth month, was Marai, who was a Netophathite
of the race of Zarai: and in his company were four and twenty thousand.
The eleventh, for the eleventh month, was Banaias, a Pharathonite
of the sons of Ephraim: and in his company were four and twenty
thousand.
The twelfth, for the twelfth month, was Holdai a Netophathite, of
the race of Gothoniel: and in his company were four and twenty thousand.
Now the chiefs over the tribes of Israel were these: over the
Over the Levites, Hasabias the son of Camuel: over the Aaronites,
Over Juda, Eliu the brother of David over Issachar, Amri the son
of Michael:
Over the Zabulonites, Jesmaias the son of Adias: over the
Over the sons of Ephraim, Osee the son of Ozaziu: over the half
tribe of Manasses, Joel the son of Phadaia:
And over the half tribe of Manasses in Galaad, Jaddo the son of
And over Dan, Ezrihel the son of Jeroham: these were the princes
of the children of Israel.
But David would not number them from twenty years old and under:
because the lord had said that he would multiply Israel like the stars
of heaven.
Joab the son of Sarvia began to number, but he finished not:
because upon this there fell wrath upon Israel: and therefore the number
of them that were numbered, was not registered in the chronicles of king
And over the king's treasures was Azmoth the son of Adiel: and
over those stores which were in the cities, and in the villages, and, in
the castles, was Jonathan the son of Ozias.
And over the tillage, and the husbandmen, who tilled the ground,
was Ezri the son of Chelub:
And over the dressers of the vine yards, was Semeias a Romathite:
and over the wine cellars, Zabdias an Aphonite.
And over the oliveyards and the fig groves, which were in the
plains, was Balanam a Gederite: and over the oil cellars, Joas.
And over the herds that fed in Saron, was Setrai a Saronite: and
over the oxen in the valleys, Saphat the son of Adli:
And over the camels, Ubil an Ishmahelite and over the asses,
And over the sheep Jaziz an Agarene. All these were the rulers of
the substance of king David.
And Jonathan David's uncle, a counsellor, a wise and learned man:
he and Jahiel the son of Hachamoni were with the king's sons.
And Achitophel was the king's counsellor, and Chusai the
And after Achitophel was Joiada the son of Banaias, and Abiathar.
giveth him a pattern of the temple.
And David assembled all the chief men of Israel, the princes of
the tribes, and the captains of the companies, who waited on the king:
and the captains over thousands, and over hundreds, and them who had the
charge over the substance and possessions of the king, and his sons with
the officers of the court, and the men of power, and all the bravest of
the army at Jerusalem.
And the king rising up, and standing said: Hear me, my brethren
and my people: I had a thought to have built a house, in which the ark
of the Lord, and the footstool of our God might rest: and prepared all
things for the building.
And God said to me: Thou shalt not build a house to my name:
because thou art a man of war, and hast shed blood.
But the Lord God of Israel chose me of all the house of my father,
to be king over Israel for ever: for of Juda he chose the princes: and
of the house of Juda, my father's house: and among the sons of my
father, it pleased him to choose me king over all Israel.
And among my sons (for the Lord hath given me many sons) he hath
chosen Solomon my son, to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord
over Israel.
And he said to me: Solomon thy son shall build my house, and my
courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be a father to
him.
And I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he continue to keep
my commandments, and my judgments, as at this day.
Now then before all the assembly of Israel, in the hearing of our
you may possess the good land, and may leave it to your children after
you for ever.
And thou my son Solomon, know the God of thy father, and serve him
with a perfect heart, and a willing mind: for the Lord searcheth all
hearts, and understandeth all the thoughts of minds. If thou seek him,
thou shalt find him: but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for
ever.
Now therefore seeing the Lord hath chosen thee to build the house
of the sanctuary, take courage, and do it.
And David gave to Solomon his son a description of the porch, and
of the temple, and of the treasures, and of the upper floor, and of the
inner chambers, and of the house for the mercy seat,
As also of all the courts, which he had in his thought, and of
the chambers round about, for the treasures of the house of the Lord,
and for the treasures of the consecrated things,
And of the divisions of the priests and of the Levites, for all
the works of the house of the Lord, and for all the vessels of the
service of the temple of the Lord.
Gold by weight for every vessel for the ministry. And silver by
weight according to the diversity of the vessels and uses.
He gave also gold for the golden candlesticks, and their lamps,
according to the dimensions of every candlestick, and the lamps thereof.
candlesticks, and for their lamps according to the diversity of the
dimensions of them.
He gave also gold for the tables of proposition, according to the
diversity of the tables: in like manner also silver for other tables of
silver.
For fleshhooks also, and bowls, and censors of fine gold, and for
little lions of gold, according to the measure he gave by weight, for
every lion. In like manner also for lions of silver he set aside a
different weight of silver.
And for the altar of incense, he gave the purest gold: and to
make the likeness of the chariot of the cherubims spreading their wings,
and covering the ark of the covenant of the Lord.
All these things, said he, came to me written by the hand of the
And David said to Solomon his son: Act like a man, and take
courage, and do: fear not, and be not dismayed: for the Lord my God will
be with thee, and will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, till thou hast
finished all the work for the service of the house of the Lord.
Behold the courses of the priests and the Levites, for every
ministry of the house of the Lord, stand by thee, and are ready, and
both the princes, and the people know how to execute all thy
commandments.
liberally to the building of the temple. His thanksgiving, prayer, and
sacrifices: his death.
And king David said to all the assembly: Solomon my son, whom
alone God hath chosen, is as yet young and tender: and the work is
great, for a house is prepared not for man, but for God.
And I with all my ability have prepared the expenses for the house
of my God. Gold for vessels of gold, and silver for vessels of silver,
brass for things of brass, iron for things of iron, wood for things of
wood: and onyx stones, and stones like alabaster, and of divers colours,
and all manner of precious stones, and marble of Paros in great
abundance.
Now over and above the things which I have offered into the house
of my God I give of my own proper goods, gold and silver for the temple
of my God, beside what things I have prepared for the holy house.
Three thousand talents of gold of the gold of Ophir: and seven
thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the temple.
And gold for wheresoever there is need of gold: and silver for
wheresoever there is need of silver, for the works to be made by the
hands of the artificers: now if any man is willing to offer, let him
fill his hand to day, and offer what he pleaseth to the Lord.
Then the heads of the families, and the princes of the tribes of
of the king's possessions promised,
And they gave for the works of the house of the Lord, of gold,
five thousand talents, and ten thousand solids: of silver ten thousand
talents: and of brass eighteen thousand talents: and of iron a hundred
thousand talents.
And all they that had stones, gave them to the treasures of the
house of the Lord, by the hand of Jahiel the Gersonite.
And the people rejoiced, when they promised their offerings
willingly: because they offered them to the Lord with all their heart:
and David the king rejoiced also with a great joy.
And he blessed the Lord before all the multitude, and he said:
eternity.
Thine, O Lord, is magnificence, and power, and glory, and
victory: and to thee is praise: for all that is in heaven, and in earth,
is thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art above all princes.
Thine are riches, and thine is glory, thou hast dominion over
all, in thy hand is power and might: in thy hand greatness, and the
empire of all things.
Now therefore our God we give thanks to thee, and we praise thy
glorious name.
Who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to
promise thee all these things? all things are thine: and we have given
thee what we received of thy hand.
For we are sojourners before thee, and strangers, as were all our
fathers. Our days upon earth are as a shadow, and there is no stay.
O Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build
thee a house for thy holy name, is from thy hand, and all things are
thine.
I know my God that thou provest hearts, and lovest simplicity,
wherefore I also in the simplicity of my heart, have joyfully offered
all these things: and I have seen with great joy thy people, which are
here present, offer thee their offerings.
O Lord God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Israel our fathers,
keep for ever this will of their heart, and let this mind remain always
for the worship of thee.
And give to Solomon my son a perfect heart, that he may keep thy
commandments, thy testimonies, and thy ceremonies, and do all things:
and build the house, for which I have provided the charges.
And David commanded all the assembly: Bless ye the Lord our God.
bowed themselves and worshipped God, and then the king.
And they sacrificed victims to the Lord: and they offered
holocausts the next day, a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, a
thousand lambs, with their libations, and with every thing prescribed
most abundantly for all Israel.
And they ate, and drank before the Lord that day with great joy.
anointed him to the Lord to be prince, and Sadoc to be high priest.
And Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king instead of
And all the princes, and men of power, and all the sons of king
And the Lord magnified Solomon over all Israel: and gave him the
glory of a reign, such as no king of Israel had before him.
So David the son of Isai reigned over all Israel.
And the days that he reigned over Israel, were forty years: in
And he died in a good age, full of days, and riches, and glory.
Now the acts of king David first and last are written in the book
of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the
book of Gad the seer:
And of all his reign, and his valour, and of the times that
passed under him, either in Israel, or in all the kingdoms of the
countries.
giveth him.
And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the Lord his God was with him, and magnified him to a high degree.
And Solomon gave orders to all Israel, to the captains of
thousands, and of hundreds, and to the rulers, and to the judges of all
And he went with all the multitude to the high place of Gabaon,
where was the tabernacle of the covenant of the Lord, which Moses the
servant of God made, in the wilderness.
For David had brought the ark of God from Cariathiarim to the
place, which he had prepared for it, and where he had pitched a
tabernacle for it, that is, in Jerusalem.
And the altar of brass, which Beseleel the son of Uri the son of
and all the assembly sought it:
And Solomon went up thither to the brazen altar, before the
tabernacle of the covenant of the Lord, and offered up on it a thousand
victims.
And behold that night God appeared to him, saying: Ask what thou
wilt that I should give thee.
And Solomon said to God: Thou hast shewn great kindness to my
father David: and hast made me king in his stead.
Now therefore, O Lord God, let thy word be fulfilled, which thou
hast promised to David my father: for thou hast made me king over thy
great people, which is as innumerable as the dust of the earth.
Give me wisdom and knowledge that I may come in and go out before
thy people: for who can worthily judge this thy people, which is so
great?
And God said to Solomon: Because this choice hath pleased thy
heart, and thou hast not asked riches, and wealth, and glory, nor the
lives of them that hate thee, nor many days of life: but hast asked
wisdom and knowledge, to be able to judge my people, over which I have
made thee king,
Wisdom and knowledge are granted to thee: and I will give thee
riches, and wealth, and glory, so that none of the kings before thee,
nor after thee, shall be like thee.
Then Solomon came from the high place of Gabaon to Jerusalem
before the tabernacle of the covenant, and reigned over Israel.
And he gathered to himself chariots and horsemen, and he had a
thousand four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen: and he
placed them in the cities of the chariots, and with the king in
And the king made silver and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones,
and cedar trees as sycamores, which grow in the plains in great
multitude.
And there were horses brought him from Egypt, and from Coa by the
king's merchants, who went, and bought at a price,
A chariot of four horses for six hundred pieces of silver, and a
horse for a hundred and fifty: in like manner market was made in all the
kingdoms of the Hethites, and of the kings of Syria.
And Solomon determined to build a house to the name of the Lord,
and a palace for himself.
And he numbered out seventy thousand men to bear burdens, and
eighty thousand to hew stones in the mountains, and three thousand six
hundred to oversee them.
He sent also to Hiram king of Tyre, saying: As thou didst with
which he dwelt:
So do with me that I may build a house to the name of the Lord my
aromatical spices, and for the continual setting forth of bread, and for
the holocausts, morning and evening, and on the sabbaths, and on the new
moons, and the solemnities of the Lord our God for ever, which are
commanded for Israel.
For the house which I desire to build, is great: for our God is
great above all gods.
Who then can be able to build him a worthy house? if heaven, and
the heavens of heavens cannot contain him: who am I that I should be
able to build him a house? but to this end only, that incense may be
burnt before him.
Send me therefore a skilful man, that knoweth how to work in gold,
and in silver, in brass, and in iron, in purple, in scarlet and in blue,
and that hath skill in engraving, with the artificers, which I have with
me in Judea and Jerusalem, whom David my father provided.
Send me also cedars, and fir trees, and pine trees from Libanus:
for I know that thy servants are skilful in cutting timber in Libanus,
and my servants shall be with thy servants,
To provide me timber in abundance. For the house which I desire to
build, is to be exceeding great, and glorious.
And I will give thy servants the workmen that are to cut down the
trees, for their food twenty thousand cores of wheat, and as many cores
of barley, and twenty thousand measures of wine, and twenty thousand
measures of oil.
And Hiram king of Tyre sent a letter to Solomon, saying: Because
the Lord hath loved his people, therefore he hath made thee king over
them.
And he added, saying: Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who
made heaven and earth, who hath given to king David a wise and knowing
son, endued with understanding and prudence, to build a house to the
I therefore have sent thee my father Hiram, a wise and most
skilful man,
The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, whose father was a
iron, and in marble, and in timber, in purple also, and violet, and silk
and scarlet: and who knoweth to grave all sort of graving, and to devise
ingeniously all that there may be need of in the work with thy
artificers, and with the artificers of my lord David thy father.
The wheat therefore, and the barley and the oil, and the wine,
which thou, my lord, hast promised, send to thy servants.
And we will cut down as many trees out of Libanus, as thou shalt
want, and will convey them in floats by sea to Joppe: and it will be thy
part to bring them thence to Jerusalem.
And Solomon numbered all the proselytes in the land of Israel,
after the numbering which David his father had made, and they were found
a hundred and fifty-three thousand and six hundred.
And he set seventy thousand of them to carry burdens on their
shoulders, and eighty thousand to hew stones in the mountains: and three
thousand and six hundred to be overseers of the work of the people.
pillars.
And Solomon began to build the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, in
mount Moria, which had been shewn to David his father, in the place
which David had prepared in the thrashingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.
And he began to build in the second month, in the fourth year of
his reign.
Now these are the foundations, which Solomon laid, to build the
house of God, the length by the first measure sixty cubits, the breadth
twenty cubits.
And the porch in the front, which was extended in length according
to the measure of the breadth of the house, twenty cubits: and the
height was a hundred and twenty cubits: and he overlaid it within with
pure gold.
And the greater house he ceiled with deal boards, and overlaid them
with plates of fine gold throughout: and he graved in them palm trees,
and like little chains interlaced with one another.
He paved also the floor of the temple with most precious marble, of
great beauty.
And the gold of the plates with which he overlaid the house, and
the beams thereof, and the posts, and the walls, and the doors was of
the finest: and he graved cherubims on the walls.
He made also the house of the holy of holies: the length of it
according to the breadth of the temple, twenty cubits, and the breadth
of it in like manner twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with plates of
gold, amounting to about six hundred talents.
He made also nails of gold, and the weight of every nail was fifty
sicles: the upper chambers also he overlaid with gold.
He made also in the house of the holy of holies two cherubims of
image work: and he overlaid them with gold.
The wings of the cherubims were extended twenty cubits, so that
one wing was five cubits long, and reached to the wall of the house: and
the other was also five cubits long, and reached to the wing of the
other cherub.
In like manner the wing of the other cherub, was five cubits long,
and reached to the wall: and his other wing was five cubits long, and
touched the wing of the other cherub.
So the wings of the two cherubims were spread forth, and were
extended twenty cubits: and they stood upright on their feet, and their
faces were turned toward the house without.
He made also a veil of violet, purple, scarlet, and silk: and
wrought in it cherubims.
He made also before the doors of the temple two pillars, which
were five and thirty cubits high: and their chapiters were five cubits.
He made also as it were little chains in the oracle, and he put
them on the heads of the pillars: and a hundred pomegranates, which he
put between the little chains.
These pillars he put at the entrance of the temple, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left: that which was on the right hand,
he called Jachin: and that on the left hand, Booz.
candlesticks and other vessels and ornaments of the temple.
He made also an altar of brass twenty cubits long, and twenty
cubits broad, and ten cubits high.
Also a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in
compass: it was five cubits high, and a line of thirty cubits compassed
it round about.
And under it there was the likeness of oxen, and certain engravings
on the outside of ten cubits compassed the belly of the sea, as it were
with two rows.
And the oxen were cast: and the sea itself was set upon the twelve
oxen, three of which looked toward the north, and other three toward the
west: and other three toward the south, and the other three that
remained toward the east, and the sea stood upon them: and the hinder
parts of the oxen were inward under the sea.
Now the thickness of it was a handbreadth, and the brim of it was
like the brim of a cup, or of a crisped lily: and it held three thousand
measures.
He made also ten lavers: and he set five on the right hand, and
five on the left, to wash in them all such things as they were to offer
for holocausts: but the sea was for the priests to wash in.
And he made ten golden candlesticks, according to the form which
they were commanded to be made by: and he set them in the temple, five
on the right hand, and five on the left.
Moreover also ten tables: and he set them in the temple, five on
the right side, and five on the left. Also a hundred bowls of gold.
He made also the court of the priests, and a great hall, and doors
in the hall, which he covered with brass.
And he set the sea on the right side over against the east toward
the south.
And Hiram made caldrons, and fleshhooks, and bowls: and finished
all the king's work the house of God:
That is to say, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the
chapiters, and the network, to cover the chapiters over the pommels.
And four hundred pomegranates, and two wreaths of network, so that
two rows of pomegranates were joined to each wreath, to cover the
pommels, and the chapiters of the pillars.
He made also bases, and lavers, which he set upon the bases:
One sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;
And the caldrons, and fleshhooks, and bowls. All the vessels did
brass.
In the country near the Jordan did the king cast them, in a clay
ground between Sochot and Saredatha.
And the multitude of vessels was innumerable, so that the weight
of the brass was not known.
And Solomon made all the vessels for the house of God, and the
golden altar, and the tables, upon which were the loaves of proposition,
The candlesticks also of most pure gold with their lamps to give
light before the oracle, according to the manner.
And certain flowers, and lamps, and golden tongs: all were made of
the finest gold.
The vessels also for the perfumes, and the censers, and the bowls,
and the mortars, of pure gold. And he graved the doors of the inner
temple, that is, for the holy of holies: and the doors of the temple
without were of gold. And thus all the work was finished which Solomon
made in the house of the Lord.
filled with the glory of God.
Then Solomon brought in all those things that David his father had
vowed, the silver, and the gold, and all the vessels he put among the
treasures of the house of God.
And after this he gathered together the ancients of Israel and all
the princes of the tribes, and the heads of the families, of the
children of Israel to Jerusalem, to bring the ark of the covenant of the
And all the men of Israel came to the king in the solemn day of the
seventh month.
And when all the ancients of Israel were come, the Levites took up
the ark,
And brought it in, together with all the furniture of the
tabernacle. And the priests with the Levites carried the vessels of the
sanctuary, which were in the tabernacle.
And king Solomon and all the assembly of Israel and all that were
gathered together before the ark, sacrificed rams, and oxen without
number: so great was the multitude of the victims.
And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord into
its place, that is, to the oracle of the temple, into the holy of holies
under the wings of the cherubims:
So that the cherubims spread their wings over the place, in which
the ark was set, and covered the ark itself and its staves.
Now the ends of the staves wherewith the ark was carried, because
they were some thing longer, were seen before the oracle: but if a man
were a little outward, he could not see them.  So the ark has been there
unto this day.
And there was nothing else in the ark but the two tables which
Now when the priests were come out of the sanctuary, for all the
priests that could be found there, were sanctified: and as yet at that
time the courses and orders of the ministries were not divided among
them,
Both the Levites and the singing men, that is, both they that were
under Asaph, and they that were under Heman, and they that were under
sounded with cymbals, and psalteries, and harps, standing on the east
side of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests, sounding
with trumpets.
So when they all sounded together, both with trumpets, and voice,
and cymbals, and organs, and with divers kind of musical instruments,
and lifted up their voice on high: the sound was heard afar off, so that
when they began to praise the Lord, and to say: Give glory to the Lord
for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever: the house of God was
filled with a cloud.
Nor could the priests stand and minister by reason of the cloud.
Then Solomon said: The Lord promised that he would dwell in a
cloud.
But I have built a house to his name, that he might dwell there for
ever.
And the king turned his face, and blessed all the multitude of
Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who hath accomplished in
deed that which he spoke to David my father, saying:
From the day that I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I
chose no city among all the tribes of Israel, for a house to be built in
it to my name: neither chose I any other man, to be the ruler of my
people Israel.
But I chose Jerusalem, that my name might be there: and I chose
And whereas David my father had a mind to build a house to the name
of the Lord the God of Israel,
The Lord said to him: Forasmuch as it was thy will to build a house
to my name, thou hast done well indeed in having such a will:
But thou shalt not build the house, but thy son, who shall come out
of thy loins, he shall build a house to my name.
The Lord therefore hath accomplished his word which he spoke: and
of Israel, as the Lord promised: and have built a house to the name of
the Lord God of Israel.
And I have put in it the ark, wherein is the covenant of the Lord,
which he made with the children of Israel.
And he stood before the altar of the Lord, in presence of all the
multitude of Israel, and stretched forth his hands.
For Solomon had made a brazen scaffold, and had set it in the
midst of the temple, which was five cubits long, and five cubits broad,
and three cubits high: and he stood upon it: then kneeling down in the
presence of all the multitude of Israel, and lifting up his hands
towards heaven,
He said: O Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee in heaven
nor in earth: who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants, that
walk before thee with all their hearts:
Who hast performed to thy servant David my father all that thou
hast promised him: and hast accomplished in fact, what thou hast spoken
with thy mouth, as also the present time proveth.
Now then, O Lord God of Israel, fulfil to thy servant David my
father, whatsoever thou hast promised him, saying: There shall not fail
thee a man in my sight, to sit upon the throne of Israel: yet so that
thy children take heed to their ways, and walk in my law, as thou hast
walked before me.
And now, Lord God of Israel, let thy word be established which
thou hast spoken to thy servant David.
Is it credible then that God should dwell with men on the earth?
this house, which I have built?
But to this end only it is made, that thou mayest regard the
prayer of thy servant and his supplication, O Lord my God: and mayest
hear the prayers which thy servant poureth out before thee.
That thou mayest open thy eyes upon this house day and night, upon
the place wherein thou hast promised that thy name should be called
upon,
And that thou wouldst hear the prayer which thy servant prayeth in
it: hearken then to the prayers of thy servant, and of thy people
place, that is, from heaven, and shew mercy.
If any man sin against his neighbour, and come to swear against
him, and bind himself with a curse before the altar in this house:
Then hear thou from heaven, and do justice to thy servants, so to
requite the wicked by making his wickedness fall upon his own head, and
to revenge the just, rewarding him according to his justice.
If thy people Israel be overcome by their enemies, (for they will
sin against thee,) and being converted shall do penance, and call upon
thy name, and pray to thee in this place,
Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people
their fathers.
If the heavens be shut up, and there fall no rain by reason of the
sin of the people, and they shall pray to thee in this place, and
confess to thy name, and be converted from their sins, where thou dost
afflict them,
Then hear thou from heaven, O Lord, and forgive the sins of thy
servants and of thy people Israel and teach them the good way in which
they may walk: and give rain to thy land which thou hast given to thy
people to possess.
If a famine arise in the land, or a pestilence or blasting, or
mildew, or locusts, or caterpillars: or if their enemies waste the
country, and besiege the cities, whatsoever scourge or infirmity shall
be upon them:
Then if any of thy people Israel, knowing his own scourge and
infirmity shall pray, and shall spread forth his hands in this house,
Hear thou from heaven, from thy high dwelling place, and forgive,
and render to every one according to his ways, which thou knowest him to
have in his heart: for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of
men:
That they may fear thee, and walk in thy ways all the days that
they live upon the face of the land, which thou hast given to our
fathers.
If the stranger also, who is not of thy people Israel, come from a
far country, for the sake of thy great name, and thy strong hand, and
thy stretched out arm, and adore in this place:
Hear thou from heaven thy firm dwelling place, and do all that
which that stranger shall call upon thee for: that all the people of the
earth may know thy name, and may fear thee, as thy people Israel, and
may know, that thy name is invoked upon this house, which I have built.
If thy people go out to war against their enemies, by the way that
thou shalt send them, and adore thee towards the way of this city, which
thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built to thy name:
Then hear thou from heaven their prayers, and their supplications,
and revenge them.
And if they sin against thee (for there is no man that sinneth
not) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them up to their enemies,
and they lead them away captive to a land either afar off, or near at
hand,
And if they be converted in their heart in the land to which they
were led captive, and do penance, and pray to thee in the land of their
captivity saying: We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have dealt
unjustly:
And return to thee with all their heart, and with all their soul,
in the land of their captivity, to which they were led away, and adore
thee towards the way of their own land which thou gavest their fathers,
and of the city, which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have
built to thy name:
Then hear thou from heaven, that is, from thy firm dwelling place,
their prayers, and do judgment, and forgive thy people, although they
have sinned:
For thou art my God: let thy eyes, I beseech thee, be open, and
let thy ears be attentive to the prayer, that is made in this place.
Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou and
the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O Lord God, put on salvation,
and thy saints rejoice in good things.
O Lord God, turn not away the face of thy anointed: remember the
mercies of David thy servant.
dedication of the temple. God signifieth his having heard Solomon's
prayer: yet so if he continue to serve him.
And when Solomon had made an end of his prayer, fire came down from
heaven, and consumed the holocausts and the victims: and the majesty of
the Lord filled the house.
Neither could the priests enter into the temple of the Lord,
because the majesty of the Lord had filled the temple of the Lord.
Moreover all the children of Israel saw the fire coming down, and
the glory of the Lord upon the house: and falling down with their faces
to the ground, upon the stone pavement, they adored and praised the
And the king and all the people sacrificed victims before the Lord.
And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty-two thousand oxen,
and one hundred and twenty thousand rams: and the king and all the
people dedicated the house of God.
And the priests stood in their offices: and the Levites with the
instruments of music of the Lord, which king David made to praise the
their ministry: and the priests sounded with trumpets before them, and
all Israel stood.
Solomon also sanctified the middle of the court before the temple
of the Lord: for he offered there the holocausts, and the fat of the
peace offerings: because the brazen altar, which he had made, could not
hold the holocausts and the sacrifices and the fat:
And Solomon kept the solemnity at that time seven days, and all
to the torrent of Egypt.
And he made on the eighth day a solemn assembly, because he had
kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and had celebrated the
solemnity seven days.
So on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent
away the people to their dwellings, joyful and glad for the good that
the Lord had done to David, and to Solomon, and to all Israel his
people.
And Solomon finished the house of the Lord, and the king's house,
and all that he had designed in his heart to do, in the house of the
And the Lord appeared to him by night, and said: I have heard thy
prayer, and I have chosen this place to myself for a house of sacrifice.
If I shut up heaven, and there fall no rain, or if I give orders,
and command the locust to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among
my people:
And my people, upon whom my name is called, being converted, shall
make supplication to me, and seek out my face, and do penance for their
most wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their
sins and will heal their land.
My eyes also shall be open, and my ears attentive to the prayer of
him that shall pray in this place.
For I have chosen, and have sanctified this place, that my name
may be there for ever, and my eyes and my heart may remain there
perpetually.
And as for thee, if thou walk before me, as David thy father
walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and keep my
justices and my judgments:
I will raise up the throne of thy kingdom, as I promised to David
thy father, saying: There shall not fail thee a man of thy stock to be
ruler in Israel.
But if you turn away, and forsake my justices, and my commandments
which I have set before you, and shall go and serve strange gods, and
adore them,
I will pluck you up by the root out of my land which I have given
you: and this house which I have sanctified to my name, I will cast away
from before my face, and will make it a byword, and an example among all
nations.
And this house shall be for a proverb to all that pass by, and
they shall be astonished and say: Why hath the Lord done thus to this
land, and to this house?
And they shall answer: Because they forsook the Lord the God of
their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold
on strange gods, and adored them, and worshipped them: therefore all
these evils are come upon them.
And at the end of twenty years after Solomon had built the house of
the Lord and his own house:
He built the cities which Hiram had given to Solomon, and caused
the children of Israel to dwell there.
He went also into Emath Suba, and possessed it.
And he built Palmira in the desert, and he built other strong
cities in Emath.
And he built Beth-horon the upper, and Beth-horon the nether,
walled cities with gates and bars and locks.
Balaath also and all the strong cities that were Solomon's, and all
the cities of the chariots, and the cities of the horsemen.  All that
and in all the land of his dominion.
All the people that were left of the Hethites, and the Amorrhites,
and the Pherezites, and the Hevites, and the Jebusites, that were not of
the stock of Israel:
Of their children, and of the posterity, whom the children of
But of the children of Israel he set none to serve in the king's
works: for they were men of war, and chief captains, and rulers of his
chariots and horsemen.
And all the chief captains of king Solomon's army were two hundred
and fifty, who taught the people.
And he removed the daughter of Pharao from the city of David, to
the house which he had built for her. For the king said: My wife shall
not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, for it is sanctified:
because the ark of the Lord came into it.
Then Solomon offered holocausts to the Lord upon the altar of the
That every day an offering might be made on it according to the
ordinance of Moses, in the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the
festival days three times a year, that is to say, in the feast of
unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of
tabernacles.
And he appointed according to the order of David his father the
offices of the priests in their ministries: and the Levites in their
order to give praise, and minister before the priests according to the
duty of every day: and the porters in their divisions by gate and gate:
for so David the man of God had commanded.
And the priests and Levites departed not from the king's
commandments, as to any thing that he had commanded, and as to the
keeping of the treasures.
Solomon had all charges prepared, from the day that he founded the
house of the Lord, until the day wherein he finished it.
Then Solomon went to Asiongaber, and to Ailath, on the coast of
the Red Sea, which is in the land of Edom.
And Hiram sent him ships by the hands of his servants, and skilful
mariners, and they went with Solomon's servants to Ophir, and they took
thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought it to king
And when the queen of Saba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came
to try him with hard questions at Jerusalem, with great riches, and
camels, which carried spices, and abundance of gold, and precious
stones. And when she was come to Solomon, she proposed to him all that
was in her heart.
And Solomon explained to her all that she proposed: and there was
not any thing that he did not make clear unto her.
And when she had seen these things, to wit, the wisdom of Solomon,
and the house which he had built,
And the meats of his table, and the dwelling places of his
servants, and the attendance of his officers, and their apparel, his
cupbearers also, and their garments, and the victims which he offered in
the house of the Lord: there was no more spirit in her, she was so
astonished.
And she said to the king: The word is true which I heard in my
country of thy virtues and wisdom.
I did not believe them that told it, until I came, and my eyes had
seen, and I had proved that scarce one half of thy wisdom had been told
me: thou hast exceeded the same with thy virtues.
Happy are thy men, and happy are thy servants, who stand always
before thee, and hear thy wisdom.
Blessed be the Lord thy God, who hath been pleased to set thee on
his throne, king of the Lord thy God. Because God loveth Israel, and
will preserve them forever: therefore hath he made thee king over them,
to do judgment and justice.
And she gave to the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
spices in great abundance, and most precious stones: there were no such
spices as these which the queen of Saba gave to king Solomon.
And the servants also of Hiram, with the servants of Solomon,
brought gold from Ophir, and thyine trees, and most precious stones:
And the king made of the thyine trees stairs in the house of the
men: never were there seen such trees in the land of Juda.
And king Solomon gave to the queen of Saba all that she desired,
and that she asked, and many more things than she brought to him: so she
returned, and went to her own country with her servants.
And the weight of the gold, that was brought to Solomon every
year, was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold:
Beside the sum which the deputies of divers nations, and the
merchants were accustomed to bring, and all the kings of Arabia, and the
lords of the lands, who brought gold and silver to Solomon.
And king Solomon made two hundred golden spears, of the sum of six
hundred pieces of gold, which went to every spear:
And three hundred golden shields of three hundred pieces of gold,
which went to the covering of every shield: and the king put them in the
armoury, which was compassed with a wood.
The king also made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with
pure gold.
And six steps to go up to the throne, and a footstool of gold, and
two arms one on either side, and two lions standing by the arms:
Moreover twelve other little lions standing upon the steps on both
sides: there was not such a throne in any kingdom.
And all the vessels of the king's table were of gold, and the
vessels of the house of the forest of Libanus were of the purest gold.
For the king's ships went to Tharsis with the servants of Hiram,
once in three years: and they brought thence gold and silver, and ivory,
and apes, and peacocks.
And Solomon was magnified above all the kings of the earth for
riches and glory.
And all the kings of the earth desired to see the face of Solomon,
that they might hear the wisdom which God had given in his heart.
And every year they brought him presents, vessels of silver and of
gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, and horses, and mules.
And Solomon had forty thousand horses in the stables, and twelve
thousand chariots, and horsemen, and he placed them in the cities of the
chariots and where the king was in Jerusalem.
And he exercised authority over all the kings from the river
And he made silver as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones: and cedars
as common as the sycamores, which grow in the plains.
And horses were brought to him out of Egypt, and out of all
countries.
Now the rest of the acts of Solomon first and last are written in
the words of Nathan the prophet, and in the books of Ahias the Silonite,
and in the vision of Addo the seer, against Jeroboam the son of Nabat.
And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.
And he slept with his fathers: and they buried him in the city of
And Roboam went to Sichem: for thither all Israel were assembled,
to make him king.
And when Jeroboam the son of Nabat, who was in Egypt, (for he was
fled thither from Solomon,) heard it, forthwith he returned.
And they sent for him, and he came with all Israel, and they spoke
to Roboam, saying:
Thy father oppressed with a most grievous yoke, do thou govern us
with a lighter hand than thy father, who laid upon us a heavy servitude,
and ease some thing of the burden, that we may serve thee.
And he said to them: Come to me again after three days.  And when
the people were gone,
He took counsel with the ancients, who had stood before his father
may answer the people?
And they said to him: If thou please this people, and soothe them
with kind words, they will be thy servants for ever.
But he forsook the counsel of the ancients, and began to treat
with the young men, that had been brought up with him, and were in his
train.
And he said to them: What seemeth good to you? or what shall I
answer this people, who have said to me: Ease the yoke which thy father
laid upon us?
But they answered as young men, and brought up with him in
pleasures, and said: Thus shalt thou speak to the people, that said to
thee: Thy father made our yoke heavy, do thou ease it: thus shalt thou
answer them: My little finger is thicker than the loins of my father.
My father laid upon you a heavy yoke, and I will add more weight
to it: my father beat you with scourges, but I will beat you with
scorpions.
So Jeroboam, and all the people came to Roboam the third day, as
he commanded them.
And the king answered roughly, leaving the counsel of the
ancients.
And he spoke according to the advice of the young men: My father
laid upon you a heavy yoke, which I will make heavier: my father beat
you with scourges, but I will beat you with scorpions.
And he condescended not to the people's requests: for it was the
will of God, that his word might be fulfilled which he had spoken by the
hand of Ahias the Silonite to Jeroboam the son of Nabat.
And all the people upon the king's speaking roughly, said thus
unto him: We have no part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Isai.
house. And Israel went away to their dwellings.
But Roboam reigned over the children of Israel that dwelt in the
cities of Juda.
And king Roboam sent Aduram, who was over the tributes, and the
children of Israel stoned him, and he died: and king Roboam made haste
to get up into his chariot, and fled into Jerusalem.
And Israel revolted from the house of David unto this day.
And Roboam came to Jerusalem, and called together all the house of
warriors, to fight against Israel, and to bring back his kingdom to him.
And the word of the Lord came to Semeias the man of God, saying:
Speak to Roboam the son of Solomon the king of Juda, and to all
Thus saith the Lord: You shall not go up, nor fight against your
brethren: let every man return to his own house, for by my will this
thing has been done. And when they heard the word of the Lord, they
returned, and did not go against Jeroboam,
And Roboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built walled cities in Juda.
And he built Bethlehem, and Etam, and Thecue,
And Bethsur, and Socho, and Odollam,
And Geth, and Maresa, and Ziph,
And Aduram, and Lachis, and Azecha,
Saraa also, and Aialon, and Hebron, which are in Juda and
And when he had enclosed them with walls, he put in them
governors and storehouses of provisions, that is, of oil and of wine.
Moreover in every city he made an armoury of shields and spears,
and he fortified them with great diligence, and he reigned over Juda,
and Benjamin,
And the priests and Levites, that were in all Israel, came to him
out of all their seats,
Leaving their suburbs, and their possessions, and passing over to
from executing the priestly office to the Lord.
And he made to himself priests for the high places, and for the
devils, and for the calves which he had made.
Moreover out of all the tribes of Israel, whosoever gave their
heart to seek the Lord the God of Israel, came into Jerusalem to
sacrifice their victims before the Lord the God of their fathers.
And they strengthened the kingdom of Juda, and established Roboam
the son of Solomon for three years: for they walked in the ways of David
and of Solomon, only three years.
And Roboam took to wife Mahalath, the daughter of Jerimoth the
son of David: and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Isai.
And they bore him sons Jehus, and Somorias, and Zoom.
And after her he married Maacha the daughter of Absalom, who bore
him Abia, and Ethai, and Ziza, and Salomith.
And Roboam loved Maacha the daughter of Absalom above all his
wives and concubines: for he had married eighteen wives, and threescore
concubines: and he begot eight and twenty sons, and threescore
daughters.
But he put at the head of them Abia the son of Maacha to be the
chief ruler over all his brethren: for he meant to make him king,
Because he was wiser and mightier than all his sons, and in all
the countries of Juda, and of Benjamin, and in all the walled cities:
and he gave them provisions in abundance, and he sought many wives.
who carrieth away all the treasures of the temple.
And when the kingdom of Roboam was strengthened and fortified, he
forsook the law of the Lord, and all Israel with him.
And in the fifth year of the reign of Roboam, Sesac king of Egypt
came up against Jerusalem (because they had sinned against the Lord)
With twelve hundred chariots and threescore thousand horsemen: and
the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt, to wit,
And he took the strongest cities in Juda, and came to Jerusalem.
And Semeias the prophet came to Roboam, and to the princes of
he said to them: Thus saith the Lord: You have left me, and I have left
you in the hand of Sesac.
And the princes of Israel, and the king, being in a consternation,
said: The Lord is just.
And when the Lord saw that they were humbled, the word of the Lord
came to Semeias, saying: Because they are humbled, I will not destroy
them, and I will give them a little help, and my wrath shall not fall
upon Jerusalem by the hand of Sesac.
But yet they shall serve him, that they may know the difference
between my service, and the service of a kingdom of the earth.
So Sesac king of Egypt departed from Jerusalem, taking away the
treasures of the king's house, and he took all with him, and the golden
shields that Solomon had made,
Instead of which the king made brazen ones, and delivered them to
the captains of the shieldbearers, who guarded the entrance of the
palace.
And when the king entered into the house of the Lord, the
shieldbearers came and took them, and brought them back again to their
armoury.
But yet because they were humbled, the wrath of the Lord turned
away from them, and they were not utterly destroyed: for even in Juda
there were found good works.
King Roboam therefore was strengthened in Jerusalem, and reigned:
he was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord chose out of all
the tribes of Israel, to establish his name there: and the name of his
mother was Naama an Ammonitess.
But he did evil, and did not prepare his heart to seek the Lord.
Now the acts of Roboam first and last are written in the books of
there was war between Roboam and Jeroboam all their days.
And Roboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam, Abia reigned over Juda.
Three years he reigned in Jerusalem, and his mother's name was
and Jeroboam.
or Abessalom, and Uriel.
And when Abia had begun battle, and had with him four hundred
thousand most valiant and chosen men, Jeroboam put his army in array
against him, eight hundred thousand men, who were also chosen and most
valiant for war.
And Abia stood upon mount Semeron, which was in Ephraim, and said:
Do you not know that the Lord God of Israel gave to David the
kingdom over Israel for ever, to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt?
18.19.
And Jeroboam the son of Nabat, the servant of Solomon the son of
And there were gathered to him vain men, and children of Belial:
and they prevailed against Roboam the son of Solomon: for Roboam was
unexperienced, and of a fearful heart, and could not resist them.
And now you say that you are able to withstand the kingdom of the
multitude of people, and golden calves, which Jeroboam hath made you for
gods.
And you have cast out the priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron,
and the Levites: and you have made you priests, like all the nations of
the earth: whosoever cometh and consecrateth his hand with a bullock of
the herd, and with seven rams, is made a priest of those who are no
gods.
But the Lord is our God, whom we forsake not, and the priests who
minister to the Lord are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites are in their
order.
And they offer holocausts to the Lord, every day, morning and
evening, and incense made according to the ordinance of the law, and the
loaves are set forth on a most clean table, and there is with us the
golden candlestick, and the lamps thereof, to be lighted always in the
evening: for we keep the precepts of the Lord our God, whom you have
forsaken.
Therefore God is the leader in our army, and his priests who
sound with trumpets, and resound against you: O children of Israel,
fight not against the Lord the God of your fathers, for it is not good
for you.
While he spoke these things, Jeroboam caused an ambushment to
come about behind him. And while he stood facing the enemies, he
encompassed Juda, who perceived it not, with his army.
And when Juda looked back, they saw the battle coming upon them
both before and behind, and they cried to the Lord: and the priests
began to sound with the trumpets.
And all the men of Juda shouted: and behold when they shouted,
And the children of Israel fled before Juda, and the Lord
delivered them into their hand.
And Abia and his people slew them with a great slaughter, and
there fell wounded of Israel five hundred thousand valiant men.
And the children of Israel were brought down, at that time, and
the children of Juda were exceedingly strengthened, because they had
trusted in the Lord the God of their fathers.
And Abia pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel
and her daughters, and Jesana with her daughters, Ephron also and her
daughters.
And Jeroboam was not able to resist any more, in the days of
But Abia, being strengthened in his kingdom, took fourteen wives:
and begot two and twenty sons, and sixteen daughters.
And the rest of the acts of Abia, and of his ways and works, are
written diligently in the book of Addo the prophet.
And Abia slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead: in his days the land was
quiet ten years.
And Asa did that which was good and pleasing in the sight of his
places.
And broke the statues, and cut down the groves.
And he commanded Juda to seek the Lord the God of their fathers,
and to do the law, and all the commandments.
And he took away out of all the cities of Juda the altars, and
temples, and reigned in peace.
He built also strong cities in Juda, for he was quiet, and there
had no wars risen in his time, the Lord giving peace.
And he said to Juda: Let us build these cities, and compass them
with walls, and fortify them with towers, and gates, and bars, while all
is quiet from wars, because we have sought the Lord the God of our
fathers, and he hath given us peace round about. So they built, and
there was no hinderance in building.
And Asa had in his army of men that bore shields and spears of
bows, two hundred and eighty thousand, all these were most valiant men.
And Zara the Ethiopian came out against them with his army of ten
hundred thousand men, and with three hundred chariots: and he came as
far as Maresa.
And Asa went out to meet him, and set his army in array for
battle in the vale of Sephata, which is near Maresa:
And he called upon the Lord God, and said: Lord, there is no
difference with thee, whether thou help with few, or with many: help us,
against this multitude. O Lord thou art our God, let not man prevail
against thee.
And the Lord terrified the Ethiopians before Asa and Juda: and
the Ethiopians fled.
And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them to Gerara:
and the Ethiopians fell even to utter destruction, for the Lord slew
them, and his army fought against them, and they were destroyed. And
they took abundance of spoils,
And they took all the cities round about Gerara: for a great fear
was come upon all men: and they pillaged the cities, and carried off
much booty.
And they destroyed the sheepcotes, and took an infinite number of
cattle, and of camels: and returned to Jerusalem.
mother.
And the spirit of God came upon Azarias the son of Oded,
And he went out to meet Asa, and said to him: Hear ye me, Asa, and
all Juda and Benjamin: The Lord is with you, because you have been with
him. If you seek him, you shall find: but if you forsake him, he will
forsake you.
And many days shall pass in Israel, without the true God, and
without a priest a teacher, and without the law.
And when in their distress they shall return to the Lord the God
of Israel, and shall seek him, they shall find him.
At that time there shall be no peace to him that goeth out and
cometh in, but terrors on every side among all the inhabitants of the
earth.
For nation shall fight against nation, and city against city, for
the Lord will trouble them with all distress.
Do you therefore take courage, and let not your hands be weakened:
for there shall be a reward for your work.
And when Asa had heard the words, and the prophecy of Azarias the
son of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and took away the idols out of
all the land of Juda, and out of Benjamin, and out of the cities of
mount Ephraim, which he had taken, and he dedicated the altar of the
And he gathered together all Juda and Benjamin, and the strangers
with them of Ephraim, and Manasses, and Simeon: for many were come over
to him out of Israel, seeing that the Lord his God was with him.
And when they were come to Jerusalem in the third month, in the
fifteenth year of the reign of Asa,
They sacrificed to the Lord in that day of the spoils, and of the
prey, that they had brought, seven hundred oxen, and seven thousand
rams.
And he went in to confirm as usual the covenant, that they should
seek the Lord the God of their fathers with all their heart, and with
all their soul.
And if any one, said he, seek not the Lord the God of Israel, let
him die, whether little or great, man or woman.
And they swore to the Lord with a loud voice with joyful
shouting, and with sound of trumpet, and sound of cornets,
All that were in Juda with a curse: for with all their heart they
swore, and with all their will they sought him, and they found him, and
the Lord gave them rest round about.
Moreover Maacha the mother of king Asa he deposed from the royal
authority, because she had made in a grove an idol of Priapus: and he
entirely destroyed it, and breaking it into pieces, burnt it at the
torrent Cedron.
But high places were left in Israel: nevertheless the heart of
And the things which his father had vowed, and he himself had
vowed, he brought into the house of the Lord, gold and silver, and
vessels of divers uses.
And there was no war unto the five and thirtieth year of the
kingdom of Asa.
death.
And in the six and thirtieth year of his kingdom, Baasa the king
of Israel came up against Juda, and built a wall about Rama, that no one
might safely go out or come in of the kingdom of Asa.
Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the
house of the Lord, and of the king's treasures, and sent to Benadad king
of Syria, who dwelt in Damascus, saying:
There is a league between me and thee, as there was between my
father and thy father, wherefore I have sent thee silver and gold, that
thou mayst break thy league with Baasa king of Israel, and make him
depart from me.
And when Benadad heard this, he sent the captains of his armies
against the cities of Israel: and they took Ahion, and Dan, and
And when Baasa heard of it, he left off the building of Rama, and
interrupted his work.
Then king Asa took all Juda, and they carried away from Rama the
stones, and the timber that Baasa had prepared for the building: and he
built with them Gabaa, and Maspha.
At that time Hanani the prophet came to Asa king of Juda, and said
to him: Because thou hast had confidence in the king of Syria, and not
in the Lord thy God, therefore hath the army of the king of Syria
escaped out of thy hand.
Were not the Ethiopians, and the Libyans much more numerous in
chariots, and horsemen, and an exceeding great multitude: yet because
thou trustedst in the Lord, he delivered them into thy hand?
For the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, and give strength
to those who with a perfect heart trust in him.  Wherefore thou hast
done foolishly, and for this cause from this time wars shall arise
against thee.
And Asa was angry with the seer, and commanded him to be put in
prison: for he was greatly enraged because of this thing: and he put to
death many of the people at that time.
But the works of Asa the first and last are written in the book
of the kings of Juda and Israel.
And Asa fell sick in the nine and thirtieth year of his reign, of
a most violent pain in his feet, and yet in his illness he did not seek
the Lord, but rather trusted in the skill of physicians.
And he slept with his fathers: and he died in the one and
fortieth year of his reign.
And they buried him in his own sepulchre, which he had made for
himself in the city of David: and they laid him on his bed full of
spices and odoriferous ointments, which were made by the art of the
perfumers, and they burnt them over him with very great pomp.
numerous forces.
And Josaphat his son reigned in his stead, and grew strong against
And he placed numbers of soldiers in all the fortified cities of
And the Lord was with Josaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of David his father: and trusted not in Baalim,
But in the God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and
not according to the sins of Israel.
And the Lord established the kingdom in his hand, and all Juda
brought presents to Josaphat: and he acquired immense riches, and much
glory.
And when his heart had taken courage for the ways of the Lord, he
took away also the high places and the groves out of Juda.
And in the third year of his reign, he sent of his princes
in the cites of Juda:
And with them the Levites, Semeias, and Nathanias, and Zabadias,
and Asael, and Semiramoth, and Jonathan, and Adonias, and Tobias, and
And they taught the people in Juda, having with them the book of
the law of the Lord: and they went about all the cities of Juda, and
instructed the people.
And the fear of the Lord came upon all the kingdoms of the lands
that were round about Juda, and they durst not make war against
The Philistines also brought presents to Josaphat, and tribute in
silver, and the Arabians brought him cattle, seven thousand seven
hundred rams, and as many he-goats.
And Josaphat grew, and became exceeding great: and he built in
And he prepared many works in the cities of Juda: and he had
warriors, and valiant men in Jerusalem.
Of whom this is the number of the houses and families of every
one: in Juda captains of the army, Ednas the chief, and with him three
hundred thousand most valiant men.
After him Johanan the captain, and with him two hundred and
eighty thousand.
And after him was Amasias the son of Zechri, consecrated to the
After him was Eliada valiant in battle, and with him two hundred
thousand armed with bow and shield.
After him also was Jozabad, and with him a hundred and eighty
thousand ready for war.
All these were at the hand of the king, beside others, whom he
had put in the walled cities, in all Juda.
is slain, as Micheas had foretold.
Now Josaphat was rich and very glorious, and was joined by
affinity to Achab.
And he went down to him after some years to Samaria: and Achab at
his coming killed sheep and oxen in abundance for him and the people
that came with him: and he persuaded him to go up to Ramoth Galaad.
And Achab king of Israel said to Josaphat king of Juda: Come with
me to Ramoth Galaad. And he answered him: Thou art as I am, and my
people as thy people, and we will be with thee in the war.
And Josaphat said to the king of Israel: Inquire, I beseech thee,
at present the word of the Lord.
So the king of Israel gathered together of the prophets four
hundred men, and he said to them: Shall we go to Ramoth Galaad to fight,
or shall we forbear? But they said: Go up, and God will deliver into the
king's hand.
And Josaphat said: Is there not here a prophet of the Lord, that
we may inquire also of him?
And the king of Israel said to Josaphat: There is one man, of whom
we may ask the will of the Lord: but I hate him, for he never
prophesieth good to me, but always evil: and it is Micheas the son of
And the king of Israel called one of the eunuchs, and said to him:
Now the king of Israel, and Josaphat king of Juda, both sat on
their thrones, clothed in royal robes, and they sat in the open court by
the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophesied before them.
And Sedecias the son of Chanaana made him horns of iron, and
said: Thus saith the Lord: With these shalt thou push Syria, till thou
destroy it.
And all the prophets prophesied in like manner, and said: Go up
to Ramoth Galaad, and thou shalt prosper, and the Lord will deliver them
into the king's hand.
And the messenger that went to call Micheas, said to him: Behold
the words of all the prophets with one mouth declare good to the king: I
beseech thee therefore let not thy word disagree with them, and speak
thou also good success.
And Micheas answered him: As the Lord liveth, whatsoever my God
shall say to me, that will I speak.
So he came to the king: and the king said to him: Micheas, shall
we go to Ramoth Galaad to fight, or forbear? And he answered him: Go up,
for all shall succeed prosperously, and the enemies shall be delivered
into your hands.
And the king said: I adjure thee again and again to say nothing
but the truth to me, in the name of the Lord.
Then he said: I saw all Israel scattered in the mountains, like
sheep without a shepherd: and the Lord said: These have no masters: let
every man return to his own house in peace.
And the king of Israel said to Josaphat: Did I not tell thee that
this man would not prophesy me any good, but evil?
Then he said: Hear ye therefore the word of the Lord: I saw the
on the right hand and on the left,
And the Lord said: Who shall deceive Achab king of Israel, that
he may go up and fall in Ramoth Galaad? And when one spoke in this
manner, and another otherwise:
There came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said: I
will deceive him. And the Lord said to him: By what means wilt thou
deceive him?
And he answered: I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the
mouth of all his prophets. And the Lord said: Thou shalt deceive, and
shalt prevail: go out, and do so.
Now therefore behold the Lord hath put a spirit of lying in the
mouth of all thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil against thee.
And Sedecias the son of Chanaana came, and struck Micheas on the
cheek and said: Which way went the spirit of the Lord from me, to speak
to thee?
And Micheas said: Thou thyself shalt see in that day, when thou
shalt go in from chamber to chamber, to hide thyself.
And the king of Israel commanded, saying: Take Micheas, and carry
him to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joas the son of Amelech,
And say: Thus saith the king: Put this fellow in prison, and give
him bread and water in a small quantity till I return in peace.
And Micheas said: If thou return in peace, the Lord hath not
spoken by me. And he said: Hear, all ye people.
So the king of Israel and Josaphat king of Juda went up to Ramoth
And the king of Israel said to Josaphat: I will change my dress,
and so I will go to the battle, but put thou on thy own garments. And
the king of Israel having changed his dress, went to the battle.
Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of his cavalry,
saying: Fight ye not with small, or great, but with the king of Israel
only.
So when the captains of the cavalry saw Josaphat, they said: This
is the king of Israel. And they surrounded him to attack him: but he
cried to the Lord, and he helped him, and turned them away from him.
For when the captains of the cavalry saw, that he was not the
king of Israel, they left him.
And it happened that one of the people shot an arrow at a
venture, and struck the king of Israel between the neck and the
shoulders, and he said to his chariot man: Turn thy hand, and carry me
out of the battle, for I am wounded.
And the fight was ended that day: but the king of Israel stood in
his chariot against the Syrians until the evening, and died at the
sunset.
And Josaphat king of Juda returned to his house in peace to
And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer met him, and said to him: Thou
helpest the ungodly, and thou art joined in friendship with them that
hate the Lord, and therefore thou didst deserve indeed the wrath of the
But good works are found in thee, because thou hast taken away the
groves out of the land of Juda, and hast prepared thy heart to seek the
And Josaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again to the
people from Bersabee to mount Ephraim, and brought them back to the Lord
the God of their fathers.
And he set judges of the land in all the fenced cities of Juda, in
every place.
And charging the judges, he said: Take heed what you do: for you
exercise not the judgment of man, but of the Lord: and whatsoever you
judge, it shall redound to you.
Let the fear of the Lord be with you, and do all things with
diligence: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect
of persons, nor desire of gifts.
In Jerusalem also Josaphat appointed Levites, and priests and
chiefs of the families of Israel, to judge the judgment and the cause of
the Lord for the inhabitants thereof.
And he charged them, saying, Thus shall you do in the fear of the
Every cause that shall come to you of your brethren, that dwell
in their cities, between kindred and kindred, wheresoever there is
question concerning the law, the commandment, the ceremonies, the
justifications: shew it them, that they may not sin against the Lord,
and that wrath may not come upon you and your brethren: and so doing you
shall not sin.
And Amarias the priest your high priest shall be chief in the
things which regard God: and Zabadias the son of Ismahel, who is ruler
in the house of Juda, shall be over those matters which belong to the
king's office: and you have before you the Levites for masters, take
courage and do diligently, and the Lord will be with you in good things.
seeketh God's help by public prayer and fasting. A prophet foretelleth
that God will fight for his people: the enemies destroy one another.
his navy perisheth, for his society with wicked Ochozias.
After this the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and
with them of the Ammonites, were gathered together to fight against
And there came messengers, and told Josaphat, saying: There cometh
a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea, and out of Syria,
and behold they are in Asasonthamar, which is Engaddi.
And Josaphat being seized with fear betook himself wholly to pray
to the Lord, and he proclaimed a fast for all Juda.
And Juda gathered themselves together to pray to the Lord: and all
came out of their cities to make supplication to him.
And Josaphat stood in the midst of the assembly of Juda, and
And said: O Lord God of our fathers, thou art God in heaven, and
rulest over all the kingdoms and nations, in thy hand is strength and
power, and no one can resist thee.
Didst not thou our God kill all the inhabitants of this land
before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy
friend for ever?
And they dwelt in it, and built in it a sanctuary to thy name,
saying:
If evils fall upon us, the sword of judgment, or pestilence, or
famine, we will stand in thy presence before this house, in which thy
name is called upon: and we will cry to thee in our afflictions, and
thou wilt hear, and save us.
Now therefore behold the children of Ammon, and of Moab, and
mount Seir, through whose lands thou didst not allow Israel to pass,
when they came out of Egypt, but they turned aside from them, and slew
them not,
Do the contrary, and endeavour to cast us out of the possession
which thou hast delivered to us.
O our God, wilt thou not then judge them? as for us we have not
strength enough, to be able to resist this multitude, which cometh
violently upon us. But as we know not what to do, we can only turn our
eyes to thee.
And all Juda stood before the Lord with their little ones, and
their wives, and their children.
And Jahaziel the son of Zacharias, the son of Banaias, the son of
upon whom the spirit of the Lord came in the midst of the multitude,
And he said: Attend ye, all Juda, and you that dwell in
not, and be not dismayed at this multitude: for the battle is not yours,
but God's.
To morrow you shall go down against them: for they will come up
by the ascent named Sis, and you shall find them at the head of the
torrent, which is over against the wilderness of Jeruel.
It shall not be you that shall fight, but only stand with
confidence, and you shall see the help of the Lord over you, O Juda, and
against them, and the Lord will be with you.
Then Josaphat, and Juda, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem
fell flat on the ground before the Lord, and adored him.
And the Levites of the sons of Caath, and of the sons of Core
praised the Lord the God of Israel with a loud voice, on high.
And they rose early in the morning, and went out through the
desert of Thecua: and as they were marching, Josaphat standing in the
midst of them, said: Hear me, ye men of Juda, and all the inhabitants of
believe his prophets, and all things shall succeed well.
And he gave counsel to the people, and appointed the singing men
of the Lord, to praise him by their companies, and to go before the
army, and with one voice to say: Give glory to the Lord, for his mercy
endureth for ever.
And when they began to sing praises, the Lord turned their
ambushments upon themselves, that is to say, of the children of Ammon,
and of Moab, and of mount Seir, who were come out to fight against Juda,
and they were slain.
For the children of Ammon, and of Moab, rose up against the
inhabitants of mount Seir, to kill and destroy them: and when they had
made an end of them, they turned also against one another, and destroyed
one another.
And when Juda came to the watch tower, that looketh toward the
desert, they saw afar off all the country, for a great space, full of
dead bodies, and that no one was left that could escape death.
Then Josaphat came, and all the people with him to take away the
spoils of the dead, and they found among the dead bodies, stuff of
various kinds, and garments, and most precious vessels: and they took
them for themselves, insomuch that they could not carry all, nor in
three days take away the spoils, the booty was so great.
And on the fourth day they were assembled in the valley of
that place the valley of Blessing until this day.
And every man of Juda, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem returned,
and Josaphat at their head, into Jerusalem with great joy, because the
And they came into Jerusalem with psalteries, and harps, and
trumpets into the house of the Lord.
And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
when they heard that the Lord had fought against the enemies of Israel.
And the kingdom of Josaphat was quiet, and God gave him peace
round about.
And Josaphat reigned over Juda, and he was five and thirty years
old, when he began to reign: and he reigned five and twenty years in
And he walked in the way of his father Asa and departed not from
it, doing the things that were pleasing before the Lord.
But yet he took not away the high places, and the people had not
yet turned their heart to the Lord the God of their fathers.
But the rest of the acts of Josaphat, first and last, are written
in the words of Jehu the son of Hanani, which he digested into the books
of the kings of Israel.
After these things Josaphat king of Juda made friendship with
And he was partner with him in making ships, to go to Tharsis:
and they made the ships in Asiongaber.
And Eliezer the son of Dodau of Maresa prophesied to Josaphat,
saying: Because thou hast made a league with Ochozias, the Lord hath
destroyed thy works, and the ships are broken, and they could not go to
And Josaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with them in
the city of David: and Joram his son reigned in his stead.
And he had brethren the sons of Josaphat, Azarias, and Jahiel, and
sons of Josaphat king of Juda.
And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and
pensions, with strong cities in Juda: but the kingdom he gave to Joram,
because he was the eldest.
So Joram rose up over the kingdom of his father: and when he had
established himself, he slew all his brethren with the sword, and some
of the princes of Israel.
Joram was two and thirty years old when he began to reign: and he
reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
And he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, as the house of
the sight of the Lord.
But the Lord would not destroy the house of David: because of the
covenant which he had made with him: and because he had promised to give
a lamp to him, and to his sons for ever.
In those days Edom revolted, from being subject to Juda, and made
themselves a king.
And Joram went over with his princes, and all his cavalry with
him, and rose in the night, and defeated the Edomites who had surrounded
him, and all the captains of his cavalry.
However Edom revolted, from being under the dominion of Juda unto
this day: at that time Lobna also revolted, from being under his hand.
Moreover he built also high places in the cities of Juda, and he
made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and Juda to
transgress.
And there was a letter brought him from Eliseus the prophet, in
which it was written: Thus saith the Lord the God of David thy father:
the ways of Asa king of Juda,
But hast walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and hast made
the fornication of the house of Achab, moreover also thou hast killed
thy brethren, the house of thy father, better men than thyself,
Behold the Lord will strike thee with a great plague, with all
thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy substance.
And thou shalt be sick of a very grievous disease of thy bowels,
till thy vital parts come out by little and little every day.
And the Lord stirred up against Joram the spirit of the
And they came up into the land of Juda, and wasted it, and they
carried away all the substance that was found in the king's house, his
sons also, and his wives: so that there was no son left him but Joachaz,
who was the youngest.
And besides all this the Lord struck him with an incurable
disease in his bowels.
And as day came after day, and time rolled on, two whole years
passed: then after being wasted with a long consumption, so as to void
his very bowels, his disease ended with his life.  And he died of a most
wretched illness, and the people did not make a funeral for him
according to the manner of burning, as they had done for his ancestors.
He was two and thirty years old when he began his reign, and he
reigned eight years in Jerusalem. And he walked not rightly, and they
buried him in the city of David: but not in the sepulchres of the kings.
And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ochozias his youngest son
king in his place: for the rovers of the Arabians, who had broke in upon
the camp, had killed all that were his elder brothers. So Ochozias the
son of Joram king of Juda reigned.
Ochozias was forty-two years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned one year in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother was Athalia
the daughter of Amri.
He also walked in the ways of the house of Achab: for his mother
pushed him on to do wickedly.
So he did evil in the sight of the Lord, as the house of Achab
did: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father, to his
destruction.
And he walked after their counsels. And he went with Joram the son
of Achab king of Israel, to fight against Hazael king of Syria, at
And he returned to be healed in Jezrahel: for he received many
wounds in the foresaid battle. And Ochozias the son of Joram king of
sick.
For it was the will of God against Ochozias that he should come to
So when Jehu was rooting out the house of Achab, he found the
princes of Juda, and the sons of the brethren of Ochozias, who served
him, and he slew them.
And he sought for Ochozias himself, and took him lying hid in
him: because he was the son of Josaphat, who had sought the Lord with
all his heart. And there was no more hope that any one should reign of
the race of Ochozias.
For Athalia his mother, seeing that her son was dead, rose up,
and killed all the royal family of the house of Joram.
But Josabeth the king's daughter took Joas the son of Ochozias,
and stole him from among the king's sons that were slain. And she hid
him with his nurse in a bedchamber: now Josabeth that hid him, was
daughter of king Joram, wife of Joiada the high priest, and sister of
And he was with them hid in the house of God six years, during
which Athalia reigned over the land.
slain, and idolatry to be destroyed.
And in the seventh year Joiada being encouraged, took the captains
of hundreds, to wit, Azarias the son of Jeroham, and Ismahel the son of
And they went about Juda, and gathered together the Levites out of
all the cities of Juda, and the chiefs of the families of Israel, and
they came to Jerusalem.
And all the multitude made a covenant with the king in the house
of God: and Joiada said to them: Behold the king's son shall reign, as
the Lord hath said of the sons of David.
And this is the thing that you shall do:
A third part of you that come to the sabbath, of the priests, and
of the Levites, and of the porters shall be at the gates: and a third
part at the king's house: and a third at the gate that is called the
house of the Lord.
your office, or the weekly watches.
And let no one come into the house of the Lord, but the priests,
and they that minister of the Levites: let them only come in, because
they are sanctified: and let all the rest of the people keep the watches
of the Lord.
And let the Levites be round about the king, every man with his
arms; and if any other come into the temple, let him be slain; and let
them be with the king, both coming in, and going out.
So the Levites, and all Juda did according to all that Joiada the
high priest had commanded: and they took every one his men that were
under him, and that came in by the course of the sabbath, with those who
had fulfilled the sabbath, and were to go out. For Joiada the high
priest permitted not the companies to depart, which were accustomed to
succeed one another every week.
And Joiada the priest gave to the captains the spears, and the
shields, and targets of king David, which he had dedicated in the house
of the Lord.
And he set all the people with swords in their hands from the
right side of the temple, to the left side of the temple, before the
altar, and the temple, round about the king.
And they brought out the king's son, and put the crown upon him,
and the testimony, and gave him the law to hold in his hand, and they
made him king: and Joiada the high priest and his sons anointed him: and
they prayed for him, and said: God save the king.
Now when Athalia heard the noise of the people running and
praising the king, she came in to the people, into the temple of the
And when she saw the king standing upon the step in the entrance,
and the princes, and the companies about him, and all the people of the
land rejoicing, and sounding with trumpets, and playing on instruments
of divers kinds, and the voice of those that praised, she rent her
garments, and said: Treason, treason.
And Joiada the high priest going out to the captains, and the
chiefs of the army, said to them: Take her forth without the precinct of
the temple, and when she is without let her be killed with the sword.
the Lord.
And they laid hold on her by the neck: and when she was come
within the horse gate of the palace, they killed her there.
And Joiada made a covenant between himself and all the people,
and the king, that they should be the people of the lord.
And all the people went into the house of Baal, and destroyed it:
and they broke down his altars and his idols: and they slew Mathan the
priest of Baal before the altars.
And Joiada appointed overseers in the house of the Lord, under
the hands of the priests, and the Levites, whom David had distributed in
the house of the Lord: to offer holocausts to the Lord, as it is written
in the law of Moses, with joy and singing, according to the disposition
of David.
He appointed also porters in the gates of the house of the Lord,
that none who was unclean in any thing should enter in.
And he took the captains of hundreds, and the most valiant men,
and the chiefs of the people, and all the people of the land, and they
brought down the king from the house of the Lord, and brought him
through the upper gate into the king's house, and set him on the royal
throne.
And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet:
but Athalia was slain with the sword.
idolatry and causeth Zacharias to be slain. He is slain himself by his
servants.
Joas was seven years old when he began to reign: and he reigned
forty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Sebia of Bersabee.
And he did that which is good before the Lord all the days of
And Joiada took for him two wives, by whom he had sons and
daughters.
After this Joas had a mind to repair the house of the Lord.
And he assembled the priests, and the Levites, and said to them:
the temple of your God, from year to year: and do this with speed: but
the Levites were negligent.
And the king called Joiada the chief, and said to him: Why hast
thou not taken care to oblige the Levites to bring in out of Juda and
for all the multitude of Israel to bring into the tabernacle of the
testimony?
For that wicked woman Athalia, and her children have destroyed the
house of God, and adorned the temple of Baal with all the things that
had been dedicated in the temple of the Lord.
And the king commanded, and they made a chest: and set it by the
gate of the house of the Lord on the outside.
And they made a proclamation in Juda and Jerusalem, that every man
should bring to the Lord the money which Moses the servant of God
appointed for all Israel, in the desert.
And all the princes, and all the people rejoiced: and going in
they contributed and cast so much into the chest of the Lord, that it
was filled.
And when it was time to bring the chest before the king by the
hands of the Levites, (for they saw there was much money,) the king's
scribe, and he whom the high priest had appointed went in: and they
poured out the money that was in the chest: and they carried back the
chest to its place: and thus they did from day to day, and there was
gathered an immense sum of money.
And the king and Joiada gave it to those who were over the works
of the house of the Lord: but they hired with it stonecutters, and
artificers of every kind of work to repair the house of the Lord: and
such as wrought in iron and brass, to uphold what began to be falling.
And the workmen were diligent, and the breach of the walls was
closed up by their hands, and they set up the house of the Lord in its
former state, and made it stand firm.
And when they had finished all the works, they brought the rest
of the money before the king and Joiada: and with it were made vessels
for the temple for the ministry, and for holocausts and bowls, and other
vessels of gold and silver: and holocausts were offered in the house of
the Lord continually all the days of Joiada.
But Joiada grew old and was full of days, and died when he was a
hundred and thirty years old.
And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because
he had done good to Israel, and to his house.
And after the death of Joiada, the princes of Juda went in, and
worshipped the king: and he was soothed by their services and hearkened
to them.
And they forsook the temple of the Lord the God of their fathers,
and served groves and idols, and wrath came upon Juda and Jerusalem for
this sin.
And he sent prophets to them to bring them back to the Lord, and
they would not give ear when they testified against them.
The spirit of God then came upon Zacharias the son of Joiada the
priest, and he stood in the sight of the people, and said to them: Thus
saith the Lord God: Why transgress you the commandment of the Lord which
will not be for your good, and have forsaken the Lord, to make him
forsake you?
And they gathered themselves together against him, and stoned him
at the king's commandment in the court of the house of the Lord.
And king Joas did not remember the kindness that Joiada his
father had done to him, but killed his son. And when he died, he said:
And when a year was come about, the army of Syria came up against
him: and they came to Juda and Jerusalem, and killed all the princes of
the people, and they sent all the spoils to the king of Damascus.
And whereas there came a very small number of the Syrians, the
forsaken the Lord the God of their fathers: and on Joas they executed
shameful judgments.
And departing they left him in great diseases: and his servants
rose up against him, for revenge of the blood of the son of Joiada the
priest, and they slew him in his bed, and he died: and they buried him
in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.
Now the men that conspired against him were Zabad the son of
And concerning his sons, and the sum of money which was gathered
under him, and the repairing the house of God, they are written more
diligently in the book of kings: and Amasias his son reigned in his
stead.
Amasias was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem, the name of his mother
was Joadan of Jerusalem.
And he did what was good in the sight of the Lord: but yet not
with a perfect heart.
And when he saw himself strengthened in his kingdom, he put to
death the servants that had slain the king his father.
But he slew not their children, as it is written in the book of
the law of Moses, where the Lord commanded, saying: The fathers shall
not be slain for the children, nor the children for their fathers, but
every man shall die for his own sin.
Amasias therefore gathered Juda together, and appointed them by
families, and captains of thousands and of hundreds in all Juda, and
found three hundred thousand young men that could go out to battle, and
could hold the spear and shield.
He hired also of Israel a hundred thousand valiant men, for a
hundred talents of silver.
But a man of God came to him, and said: O king, let not the army
of Israel go out with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel, and all the
children of Ephraim:
And if thou think that battles consist in the strength of the
army, God will make thee to be overcome by the enemies: for it belongeth
to God both to help, and to put to flight.
And Amasias said to the man of God: What will then become of the
hundred talents which I have given to the soldiers of Israel? and the
man of God answered him: The Lord is rich enough to be able to give thee
much more than this.
Then Amasias separated the army, that came to him out of Ephraim,
to go home again: but they being much enraged against Juda, returned to
their own country.
And Amasias taking courage led forth his people, and went to the
vale of saltpits, and slew of the children of Seir ten thousand.
And other ten thousand men the sons of Juda took, and brought to
the steep of a certain rock, and cast them down headlong from the top,
and they all were broken to pieces.
But that army which Amasias had sent back, that they should not
go with him to battle, spread themselves among the cities of Juda, from
spoil.
But Amasias after he had slain the Edomites, set up the gods of
the children of Seir, which he had brought thence, to be his gods, and
adored them, and burnt incense to them.
Wherefore the Lord being angry against Amasias, sent a prophet to
him, to say to him: Why hast thou adored gods that have not delivered
their own people out of thy hand?
And when he spoke these things, he answered him: Art thou the
king's counsellor? be quiet, lest I kill thee. And the prophet
departing, said: I know that God is minded to kill thee, because thou
hast done this evil, and moreover hast not hearkened to my counsel.
Then Amasias king of Juda taking very bad counsel, sent to Joas
the son of Joachaz the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying: Come, let us
see one another.
But he sent back the messengers, saying: The thistle that is in
son to wife: and behold the beasts that were in the wood of Libanus
passed by and trod down the thistle.
Thou hast said: I have overthrown Edom, and therefore thy heart
is lifted up with pride: stay at home, why dost thou provoke evil
against thee, that both thou shouldst fall and Juda with thee.
Amasias would not hearken to him, because it was the Lord's will
that he should be delivered into the hands of enemies, because of the
gods of Edom.
So Joas king of Israel went up, and they presented themselves to
be seen by one another: and Amasias king of Juda was in Bethsames of
And Juda fell before Israel, and they fled to their dwellings.
And Joas king of Israel took Amasias king of Juda, the son of
and broke down the walls thereof from the gate of Ephraim, to the gate
of the corner, four hundred cubits.
And he took all the gold, and silver, and all the vessels, that
he found in the house of God, and with Obededom, and in the treasures of
the king's house, moreover also the sons of the hostages, he brought
back to Samaria.
And Amasias the son of Joas king of Juda lived, after the death
of Joas the son of Joachaz king of Israel, fifteen years.
Now the rest of the acts of Amasias, the first and last, are
written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.
And after he revolted from the Lord, they made a conspiracy
against him in Jerusalem. And he fled into Lachis, and they sent, and
killed him there.
And they brought him back upon horses, and buried him with his
fathers in the city of David.
which he is struck with a leprosy.
And all the people of Juda took his son Ozias, who was sixteen
years old, and made him king in the room of Amasias his father.
He built Ailath, and restored it to the dominion of Juda, after
that the king slept with his fathers.
Ozias was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
two and fifty years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Jechelia of
And he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, according
to all that Amasias his father had done.
And he sought the Lord in the days of Zacharias that understood
and saw God: and as long as he sought the Lord, he directed him in all
things.
Moreover he went forth and fought against the Philistines, and
broke down the wall of Geth, and the wall of Jabnia, and the wall of
And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the
And the Ammonites gave gifts to Ozias: and his name was spread
abroad even to the entrance of Egypt for his frequent victories.
And Ozias built towers in Jerusalem over the gate of the corner,
and over the gate of the valley, and the rest, in the same side of the
wall, and fortified them.
And he built towers in the wilderness, and dug many cisterns, for
he had much cattle both in the plains, and in the waste of the desert:
he had also vineyards and dressers of vines in the mountains, and in
And the army of his fighting men, that went out to war, was under
the hand of Jehiel the scribe, and Maasias the doctor, and under the
hand of Henanias, who was one of the king's captains.
And the whole number of the chiefs by the families of valiant men
were two thousand six hundred.
And the whole army under them three hundred and seven thousand
five hundred: who were fit for war, and fought for the king against the
enemy.
And Ozias prepared for them, that is, for the whole army,
shields, and spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, and bows, and
slings to cast stones.
And he made in Jerusalem engines of diverse kinds, which he
placed in the towers, and in the corners of the walls, to shoot arrows,
and great stones: and his name went forth far abroad, for the Lord
helped him, and had strengthened him.
But when he was made strong, his heart was lifted up to his
destruction, and he neglected the Lord his God: and going into the
temple of the Lord, he had a mind to burn incense upon the altar of
incense.
And immediately Azarias the priest going in after him, and with
him fourscore priests of the Lord, most valiant men,
Withstood the king and said: It doth not belong to thee, Ozias,
to burn incense to the Lord, but to the priests, that is, to the sons of
do not despise: for this thing shall not be accounted to thy glory by
the Lord God.
And Ozias was angry, and holding in his hand the censer to burn
incense, threatened the priests. And presently there rose a leprosy in
his forehead before the priests, in the house of the Lord at the altar
of incense.
And Azarias the high priest, and all the rest of the priests
looked upon him, and saw the leprosy in his forehead, and they made
haste to thrust him out. Yea himself also being frightened, hasted to go
out, because he had quickly felt the stroke of the Lord.
And Ozias the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and he
dwelt in a house apart being full of the leprosy, for which he had been
cast out of the house of the Lord. And Joatham his son governed the
king's house, and judged the people of the land.
But the rest of the acts of Ozias first and last were written by
And Ozias slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
field of the royal sepulchres, because he was a leper: and Joatham his
son reigned in his stead.
Joatham was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: the name of his mother was Jerusa
the daughter of Sadoc.
And he did that which was right before the Lord, according to all
that Ozias his father had done, only that he entered not into the temple
of the Lord, and the people still transgressed.
He built the high gate of the house of the Lord, and on the wall
of Ophel he built much.
Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Juda, and castles and
towers in the forests.
He fought against the king of the children of Ammon, and overcame
them, and the children of Ammon gave him at that time a hundred talents
of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and as many measures of
barley: so much did the children of Ammon give him in the second and
third year.
And Joatham was strengthened, because he had his way directed
before the Lord his God.
Now the rest of the acts of Joatham, and all his wars, and his
works, are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Juda.
He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.
And Joatham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
city of David: and Achaz his son reigned in his stead.
Achaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem: he did not that which was right in the sight
of the Lord as David his father had done,
But walked in the ways of the kings of Israel; moreover also he
cast statues for Baalim.
It was he that burnt incense in the valley of Benennom, and
consecrated his sons in the fire according to the manner of the nations,
which the Lord slew at the coming of the children of Israel.
He sacrificed also, and burnt incense in the high places, and on
the hills, and under every green tree.
And the Lord his God delivered him into the hands of the king of
carried it to Damascus: he was also delivered into the hands of the king
of Israel, who overthrew him with a great slaughter.
For Phacee the son of Romelia slew of Juda a hundred and twenty
thousand in one day, all valiant men, because they had forsaken the Lord
the God of their fathers.
At the same time Zechri a powerful man of Ephraim, slew Maasias
the king's son, and Ezricam the governor of his house, and Elcana who
was next to the king.
And the children of Israel carried away of their brethren two
hundred thousand women, boys, and girls, and an immense booty: and they
brought it to Samaria.
At that time there was a prophet of the Lord there, whose name was
them: Behold the Lord the God of your fathers being angry with Juda,
hath delivered them into your hands, and you have butchered them
cruelly, so that your cruelty hath reached up to heaven.
Moreover you have a mind to keep under the children of Juda and
for you have sinned in this against the Lord your God.
But hear ye my counsel, and release the captives that you have
brought of your brethren, because a great indignation of the Lord
hangeth over you.
Then some of the chief men of the sons of Ephraim, Azarias the
son of Johanan, Barachias the son of Mosollamoth, Ezechias the son of
the war.
And they said to them: You shall not bring in the captives
hither, lest we sin against the Lord. Why will you add to our sins, and
heap up upon our former offences? for the sin is great, and the fierce
anger of the Lord hangeth over Israel.
So the soldiers left the spoils, and all that they had taken,
before the princes and all the multitude.
And the men, whom we mentioned above, rose up and took the
captives, and with the spoils clothed all them that were naked: and when
they had clothed and shod them, and refreshed them with meat and drink,
and anointed them because of their labour, and had taken care of them,
they set such of them as could not walk, and were feeble, upon beasts,
and brought them to Jericho the city of palm trees to their brethren,
and they returned to Samaria.
At that time king Achaz sent to the king of the Assyrians asking
help.
And the Edomites came and slew many of Juda, and took a great
booty.
The Philistines also spread themselves among the cities of the
plains, and to the south of Juda: and they took Bethsames, and Aialon,
and Gaderoth, and Socho, and Thamnan, and Gamzo, with their villages,
and they dwelt in them.
For the Lord had humbled Juda because of Achaz the king of Juda,
for he had stripped it of help, and had contemned the Lord.
idolatry.
And he brought against him Thelgathphalnasar king of the
resistance.
And Achaz stripped the house of the Lord, and the house of the
kings, and of the princes, and gave gifts to the king of the Assyrians,
and yet it availed him nothing.
Moreover also in the time of his distress he increased contempt
against the Lord: king Achaz himself by himself,
Sacrificed victims to the gods of Damascus that struck him, and
he said: The gods of the kings of Syria help them, and I will appease
them with victims, and they will help me; whereas on the contrary they
were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.
Then Achaz having taken away all the vessels of the house of God,
and broken them, shut up the doors of the temple of God, and made
himself altars in all the corners of Jerusalem.
And in all the cities of Juda he built altars to burn
frankincense, and he provoked the Lord the God of his fathers to wrath.
But the rest of his acts, and all his works first and last are
written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.
And Achaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of Jerusalem: for they received him not into the sepulchres of the kings
of Israel. And Ezechias his son reigned in his stead.
Now Ezechias began to reign, when he was five and twenty years
old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem: the name of his
mother was Abia, the daughter of Zacharias.
And he did that which was pleasing in the sight of the Lord,
according to all that David his father had done.
In the first year and month of his reign he opened the doors of
the house of the Lord, and repaired them.
And he brought the priests and the Levites, and assembled them in
the east street.
And he said to them: Hear me, ye Levites, and be sanctified,
purify the house of the Lord the God of your fathers, and take away all
filth out of the sanctuary.
Our fathers have sinned and done evil in the sight of the Lord
tabernacle of the Lord, and turned their backs.
They have shut up the doors that were in the porch, and put out
the lamps, and have not burnt incense, nor offered holocausts in the
sanctuary of the God of Israel.
Therefore the wrath of the Lord hath been stirred up against Juda
and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, and to
destruction, and to be hissed at, as you see with your eyes.
Behold, our fathers are fallen by the sword, our sons, and our
daughters, and wives are led away captives for this wickedness.
Now therefore I have a mind that we make a covenant with the Lord
the God of Israel, and he will turn away the wrath of his indignation
from us.
My sons, be not negligent: the Lord hath chosen you to stand
before him, and to minister to him, and to worship him, and to burn
incense to him.
Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the
son of Azarias, of the sons of Caath: and of the sons of Merari, Cis the
son of Abdi, and Azarias the son of Jalaleel. And of the sons of Gerson,
And of the sons of Elisaphan, Samri, and Jahiel. Also of the sons
of Asaph, Zacharias, and Mathanias.
And of the sons of Heman, Jahiel, and Semei: and of the sons of
And they gathered together their brethren, and sanctified
themselves, and went in according to the commandment of the king, and
the precept of the Lord, to purify the house of God.
And the priests went into the temple of the Lord to sanctify it,
and brought out all the uncleanness that they found within to the
entrance of the house of the Lord, and the Levites took it away, and
carried it out abroad to the torrent Cedron.
And they began to cleanse on the first day of the first month,
and on the eighth day of the same month they came into the porch of the
temple of the Lord, and they purified the temple in eight days, and on
the sixteenth day of the same month they finished what they had begun.
And they went in to king Ezechias, and said to him: We have
sanctified all the house of the Lord, and the altar of holocaust, and
the vessels thereof, and the table of proposition with all its vessels,
And all the furniture of the temple, which king Achaz in his
reign had defiled, after his transgression; and behold they are all set
forth before the altar of the Lord.
And king Ezechias rising early, assembled all the rulers of the
city, and went up into the house of the Lord:
And they offered together seven bullocks, and seven rams, and
seven lambs, and seven he-goats for sin, for the kingdom, for the
sanctuary, for Juda: and he spoke to the priests the sons of Aaron, to
offer them upon the altar of the Lord.
Therefore they killed the bullocks, and the priests took the
blood, and poured it upon the altar; they killed also the rams, and
their blood they poured also upon the altar, and they killed the lambs,
and poured the blood upon the altar.
And they brought the he-goats for sin before the king, and the
whole multitude, and they laid their hand upon them:
And the priests immolated them, and sprinkled their blood before
the altar for an expiation of all Israel: for the king had commanded
that the holocaust and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.
And he set the Levites in the house of the Lord with cymbals, and
psalteries, and harps according to the regulation of David the king, and
of Gad the seer, and of Nathan the prophet: for it was the commandment
of the Lord by the hand of his prophets.
And the Levites stood, with the instruments of David, and the
priests with trumpets.
And Ezechias commanded that they should offer holocausts upon the
altar: and when the holocausts were offered, they began to sing praises
to the Lord, and to sound with trumpets, and divers instruments which
And all the multitude adored, and the singers, and the
trumpeters, were in their office till the holocaust was finished.
And when the oblation was ended, the king, and all that were with
him bowed down and adored.
And Ezechias and the princes commanded the Levites to praise the
with great joy, and bowing the knee adored.
And Ezechias added, and said: You have filled your hands to the
all the multitude offered victims, and praises, and holocausts with a
devout mind.
And the number of the holocausts which the multitude offered, was
seventy bullocks, a hundred rams, and two hundred lambs.
And they consecrated to the Lord six hundred oxen, and three
thousand sheep.
But the priests were few, and were not enough to flay the
holocausts: wherefore the Levites their brethren helped them, till the
work was ended, and priests were sanctified, for the Levites are
sanctified with an easier rite than the priests.
So there were many holocausts, and the fat of peace offerings,
and the libations of holocausts: and the service of the house of the
And Ezechias, and all the people rejoiced because the ministry of
the Lord was accomplished. For the resolution of doing this thing was
taken suddenly.
kept fourteen days.
And Ezechias sent to all Israel and Juda: and he wrote letters to
For the king, taking counsel, and the princes, and all the
assembly of Jerusalem, decreed to keep the phase the second month.
For they could not keep it in its time; because there were not
priests enough sanctified, and the people was not as yet gathered
together to Jerusalem.
And the thing pleased the king, and all the people.
And they decreed to send messengers to all Israel from Bersabee
even to Dan, that they should come, and keep the phase to the Lord the
by the law.
And the posts went with letters by commandment of the king, and
his princes, to all Israel and Juda, proclaiming according to the king's
orders: Ye children of Israel, turn again to the Lord the God of
of you that have escaped the hand of the king of the Assyrians.
Be not like your fathers, and brethren, who departed from the Lord
the God of their fathers, and he hath given them up to destruction, as
you see.
Harden not your necks, as your fathers did: yield yourselves to
the Lord, and come to his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified forever:
serve the Lord the God of your fathers, and the wrath of his indignation
shall be turned away from you.
For if you turn again to the Lord, your brethren, and children
shall find mercy before their masters, that have led them away captive,
and they shall return into this land: for the Lord your God is merciful,
and will not turn away his face from you, if you return to him.
So the posts went speedily from city to city, through the land of
and mocked them.
Nevertheless some men of Aser, and of Manasses, and of Zabulon,
yielding to the counsel, came to Jerusalem.
But the hand of God was in Juda, to give them one heart to do the
word of the Lord, according to the commandment of the king, and of the
princes.
And much people were assembled to Jerusalem to celebrate the
solemnity of the unleavened bread in the second month:
And they arose and destroyed the altars that were in Jerusalem,
and took away all things in which incense was burnt to idols and cast
them into the torrent Cedron.
And they immolated the phase on the fourteenth day of the second
month. And the priests and the Levites being at length sanctified
offered holocausts in the house of the Lord.
And they stood in their order according to the disposition and
law of Moses the man of God: but the priests received the blood which
was to be poured out, from the hands of the Levites,
Because a great number was not sanctified: and therefore the
sanctified to the Lord.
For a great part of the people from Ephraim, and Manasses, and
otherwise than it is written: and Ezechias prayed for them, saying: The
To all them, who with their whole heart, seek the Lord the God of
their fathers: and will not impute it to them that they are not
sanctified.
And the Lord heard him, and was merciful to the people.
And the children of Israel, that were found at Jerusalem, kept
the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great joy, praising the
agreed to their office.
And Ezechias spoke to the heart of all the Levites, that had good
understanding concerning the Lord: and they ate during the seven days of
the solemnity, immolating victims of peace offerings, and praising the
And it pleased the whole multitude to keep other seven days:
which they did with great joy.
For Ezechias the king of Juda had given to the multitude a
thousand bullocks, and seven thousand sheep: and the princes had given
the people a thousand bullocks, and ten thousand sheep: and a great
number of priests was sanctified.
And all the multitude of Juda with the priests and Levites, and
all the assembly, that came out of Israel; and the proselytes of the
land of Israel, and that dwelt in Juda were full of joy.
And there was a great solemnity in Jerusalem, such as had not
been in that city since the time of Solomon the son of David king of
And the priests and the Levites rose up and blessed the people:
and their voice was heard: and their prayer came to the holy dwelling
place of heaven.
And when these things had been duly celebrated, all Israel that
were found in the cities of Juda, went out, and they broke the idols,
and cut down the groves, demolished the high places, and destroyed the
altars, not only out of all Juda and Benjamin, but out of Ephraim also
and Manasses, till they had utterly destroyed them: then all the
children of Israel returned to their possessions and cities.
And Ezechias appointed companies of the priests, and the Levites,
by their courses, every man in his own office, to wit, both of the
priests, and of the Levites, for holocausts, and for peace offerings, to
minister, and to praise, and to sing in the gates of the camp of the
And the king's part was, that of his proper substance the
holocaust should be offered always morning and evening, and on the
sabbaths, and the new moons and the other solemnities, as it is written
in the law of Moses.
He commanded also the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give to
the priests, and the Levites their portion, that they might attend to
the law of the Lord.
Which when it was noised abroad in the ears of the people, the
children of Israel offered in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine,
and oil, and honey: and brought the tithe of all things which the ground
bringeth forth.
Moreover the children of Israel and Juda, that dwelt in the cities
of Juda, brought in the tithes of oxen, and sheep, and the tithes of
holy things, which they had vowed to the Lord their God: and carrying
them all, made many heaps.
In the third month they began to lay the foundations of the heaps,
and in the seventh month, they finished them.
And when Ezechias and his princes came in, they saw the heaps, and
they blessed the Lord and the people of Israel.
And Ezechias asked the priests and the Levites, why the heaps lay
so.
Azarias the chief priest of the race of Sadoc answered him,
saying: Since the firstfruits began to be offered in the house of the
because the Lord hath blessed his people: and of that which is left is
this great store which thou seest.
Then Ezechias commanded to prepare storehouses in the house of
the Lord. And when they had done so,
They brought in faithfully both the firstfruits, and the tithes,
and all they had vowed. And the overseer of them was Chonenias the
And after him Jehiel, and Azarias, and Nahath, and Asael, and
by the commandment of Ezechias the king, and Azarias the high priest of
the house of God, to whom all things appertained.
But Core the son of Jemna the Levite, the porter of the east
gate, was overseer of the things which were freely offered to the Lord,
and of the firstfruits and the things dedicated for the holy of holies.
And under his charge were Eden, and Benjamin, Jesue, and Semeias,
and Amarias, and Sechenias, in the cities of the priests, to distribute
faithfully portions to their brethren, both little and great:
Besides the males from three years old and upward, to all that
went into the temple of the Lord, and whatsoever there was need of in
the ministry, and their offices according to their courses, day by day.
To the priests by their families, and to the Levites from the
twentieth year and upward, by their classes and companies.
And to all the multitude, both to their wives, and to their
children of both sexes, victuals were given faithfully out of the things
that had been sanctified.
Also of the sons of Aaron who were in the fields and in the
suburbs of each city, there were men appointed, to distribute portions
to all the males, among the priests and the Levites.
So Ezechias did all things which we have said in all Juda, and
wrought that which was good, and right, and truth, before the Lord his
In all the service of the house of the Lord according to the law
and the ceremonies, desiring to seek his God with all his heart, and he
did it and prospered.
recovereth from his sickness:  his other acts.
After these things, and this truth, Sennacherib king of the
desiring to take them.
And when Ezechias saw that Sennacherib was come, and that the whole
force of the war was turning against Jerusalem,
He took counsel with the princes, and the most valiant men, to stop
up the heads of the springs, that were without the city:  and as they
were all of this mind,
He gathered together a very great multitude, and they stopped up
all the springs, and the brook, that ran through the midst of the land,
saying:  Lest the kings of the Assyrians should come, and find abundance
of water.
He built up also with great diligence all the wall that had been
broken down, and built towers upon it, and another wall without:  and he
repaired Mello in the city of David, and made all sorts of arms and
shields:
And he appointed captains of the soldiers of the army:  and he
called them all together in the street of the gate of the city, and spoke
to their heart, saying:
Behave like men, and take courage:  be not afraid nor dismayed for
the king of the Assyrians, nor for all the multitude that is with him:
for there are many more with us than with him.
For with him is an arm of flesh:  with us the Lord our God, who is
our helper, and fighteth for us.  And the people were encouraged with
these words of Ezechias king of Juda.
After this, Sennacherib king of the Assyrians sent his servants to
king of Juda, and to all the people that were in the city, saying:
Thus saith Sennacherib king of the Assyrians:  In whom do you
trust, that you sit still besieged in Jerusalem?
Doth not Ezechias deceive you, to give you up to die by hunger and
thirst, affirming that the Lord your God shall deliver you from the hand
of the king of the Assyrians?
Is it not this same Ezechias, that hath destroyed his high places,
and his altars, and commanded Juda and Jerusalem, saying:  You shall
worship before one altar, and upon it you shall burn incense?
Know you not what I and my fathers have done to all the people of
the lands?  have the gods of any nations and lands been able to deliver
their country out of my hand?
Who is there among all the gods of the nations, which my fathers
have destroyed, that could deliver his people out of my hand, that your
Therefore let not Ezechias deceive you, nor delude you with a vain
persuasion, and do not believe him.  For if no god of all the nations and
kingdoms, could deliver his people out of my hand, and out of the hand of
my fathers, consequently neither shall your God be able to deliver you
out of my hand.
And many other things did his servants speak against the Lord God,
and against Ezechias his servant.
He wrote also letters full of blasphemy against the Lord the God
of Israel, and he spoke against him:  As the gods of other nations could
not deliver their people out of my hand, so neither can the God of
Moreover he cried out with a loud voice, in the Jews' tongue, to
the people that sat on the walls of Jerusalem, that he might frighten
them, and take the city.
And he spoke against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of
the people of the earth, the works of the hands of men.
And Ezechias the king, and Isaias the prophet the son of Amos,
prayed against this blasphemy, and cried out to heaven.
And the Lord sent an angel, who cut off all the stout men and the
warriors, and the captains of the army of the king of the Assyrians:  and
he returned with disgrace into his own country.  And when he was come
into the house of his god, his sons that came out of his bowels, slew him
with the sword.
And the Lord saved Ezechias and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out
of the hand of Sennacherib king of the Assyrians, and out of the hand of
all, and gave them treasures on every side.
Many also brought victims, and sacrifices to the Lord to
thenceforth in the sight of all nations.
In those days Ezechias was sick even to death, and he prayed to
the Lord:  and he heard him, and gave him a sign.
But he did not render again according to the benefits which he had
received, for his heart was lifted up:  and wrath was enkindled against
him, and against Juda and Jerusalem.
And he humbled himself afterwards, because his heart had been
lifted up, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem:  and therefore the
wrath of the Lord came not upon them in the days of Ezechias.
And Ezechias was rich, and very glorious, and he gathered himself
great treasures of silver and of gold, and of precious stones, of spices,
and of arms, of all kinds, and of vessels of great price.
Storehouses also of corn, of wine, and of oil, and stalls for all
beasts, and folds for cattle.
And he built himself cities:  for he had flocks of sheep, and
herds without number, for the Lord had given him very much substance.
This same Ezechias was, he that stopped the upper source of the
waters of Gihon, and turned them away underneath toward the west of the
city of David:  in all his works he did prosperously what he would.
But yet in the embassy of the princes of Babylon, that were sent
to him, to inquire of the wonder that had happened upon the earth, God
left him that he might be tempted, and all things might be made known
that were in his heart.
Now the rest of the acts of Ezechias, and of his mercies are
written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.
And Ezechias slept with his fathers, and they buried him above the
sepulchres of the sons of David:  and all Juda, and all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem celebrated his funeral:  and Manasses his son reigned in his
stead.
repenteth, and is restored to his kingdom, and destroyeth idolatry: his
successor Amon is slain by his servants.
Manasses was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem.
And he did evil before the Lord, according to all the abominations
of the nations, which the Lord cast out before the children of Israel:
And he turned, and built again the high places which Ezechias his
father had destroyed: and he built altars to Baalim, and made groves,
and he adored all the host of heaven, and worshipped them.
He built also altars in the house of the Lord, whereof the Lord
had said: In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.
And he built them for all the host of heaven in the two courts of
the house of the Lord.
And he made his sons to pass through the fire in the valley of
magic arts, had with him magicians, and enchanters: and he wrought many
evils before the Lord, to provoke him to anger.
He set also a graven, and a molten statue in the house of God, of
which God had said to David, and to Solomon his son: In this house, and
in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will
And I will not make the foot of Israel to be removed out of the
land which I have delivered to their fathers: yet so if they will take
heed to do what I have commanded them, and all the law, and the
ceremonies, and judgments by the hand of Moses.
So Manasses seduced Juda, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to do
evil beyond all the nations, which the Lord had destroyed before the
face of the children of Israel.
And the Lord spoke to his people, and they would not hearken.
Therefore he brought upon them the captains of the army of the
king of the Assyrians: and they took Manasses, and carried him bound
with chains and fetters to Babylon.
And after that he was in distress he prayed to the Lord his God:
and did penance exceedingly before the God of his fathers.
And he entreated him, and besought him earnestly: and he heard
his prayer, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom, and
After this he built a wall without the city of David, on the west
side of Gihon in the valley, from the entering in of the gate round
about to Ophel, and raised it up to a great height: and he appointed
captains of the army in all the fenced cities of Juda:
And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house
of the Lord: the altars also which he had made in the mount of the house
of the Lord, and in Jerusalem, and he cast them all out of the city.
And he repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed upon it
victims, and peace offerings, and praise: and he commanded Juda to serve
the Lord the God of Israel.
Nevertheless the people still sacrificed in the high places to
the Lord their God.
But the rest of the acts of Manasses, and his prayer to his God,
and the words of the seers that spoke to him in the name of the Lord the
 His prayer also, and his being heard and all his sins, and
contempt, and places wherein he built high places, and set up groves,
and statues before he did penance, are written in the words of Hozai.
And Manasses slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his
house: and his son Amon reigned in his stead.
Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned two years in Jerusalem.
And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, as Manasses his father
had done: he sacrificed to all the idols which Manasses his father had
made, and served them.
And he did not humble himself before the lord, as Manasses his
father had humbled himself, but committed far greater sin.
And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own
house.
But the rest of the multitude of the people slew them that had
killed Amon, and made Josias his son king in his stead.
covenant between God and the people.
Josias was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
one and thirty years in Jerusalem.
And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and
walked in the ways of David his father: he declined not, neither to the
right hand, nor to the left.
And in the eighth year of his reign, when he was yet a boy, he
began to seek the God of his father David: and in the twelfth year after
he began to reign, he cleansed Juda and Jerusalem from the high places,
and the groves, and the idols, and the graven things.
And they broke down before him the altars of Baalim, and
demolished the idols that had been set upon them: and he cut down the
groves and the graven things, and broke them in pieces: and strewed the
fragments upon the graves of them that had sacrificed to them.
And he burnt the bones of the priests on the altars of the idols,
and he cleansed Juda and Jerusalem.
And in the cities of Manasses, and of Ephraim, and of Simeon, even
to Nephtali he demolished all.
And when he had destroyed the altars, and the groves, and had
broken the idols in pieces, and had demolished all profane temples
throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.
Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had cleansed the
land, and the temple of the Lord, he sent Saphan the son of Elselias,
and Maasias the governor of the city, Joha the son of Joachaz the
recorder, to repair the house of the Lord his God.
And they came to Helcias the high priest: and received of him the
money which had been brought into the house of the Lord, and which the
and all the remnant of Israel, and from all Juda, and Benjamin, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Which they delivered into the hands of them that were over the
workmen in the house of the Lord, to repair the temple, and mend all
that was weak.
But they gave it to the artificers, and to the masons, to buy
stones out of the quarries, and timber for the couplings of the
building, and to rafter the houses, which the kings of Juda had
destroyed.
And they did all faithfully. Now the overseers of the workmen
were Jahath and Abdias of the sons of Merari, Zacharias and Mosollam of
the sons of Caath, who hastened the work: all Levites skilful to play on
instruments.
But over them that carried burdens for divers uses, were scribes,
and masters of the number of the Levites, and porters.
Now when they carried out the money that had been brought into
the temple of the Lord, Helcias the priest found the book of the law of
the Lord, by the hand of Moses.
And he said to Saphan the scribe: I have found the book of the
law in the house of the Lord: and he delivered it to him.
But he carried the book to the king, and told him, saying: Lo,
all that thou hast committed to thy servants, is accomplished.
They have gathered together the silver that was found in the
house of the Lord: and it is given to the overseers of the artificers,
and of the workmen, for divers works.
Moreover Helcias the priest gave me this book. And he read it
before the king.
And when he had heard the words of the law, he rent his garments:
And he commanded Helcias, and Ahicam the son of Saphan, and Abdon
the son of Micha, and Saphan the scribe, and Asaa the king's servant,
saying:
Go, and pray to the Lord for me, and for the remnant of Israel,
and Juda, concerning all the words of this book, which is found: for the
great wrath of the Lord hath fallen upon us, because our fathers have
not kept the words of the Lord, to do all things that are written in
this book.
And Helcias and they that were sent with him by the king, went to
and they spoke to her the words above mentioned.
And she answered them: Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:
Thus saith the Lord: Behold I will bring evils upon this place,
and upon the inhabitants thereof, and all the curses that are written in
this book which they read before the king of Juda.
Because they have forsaken me, and have sacrificed to strange
gods, to provoke me to wrath with all the works of their hands,
therefore my wrath shall fail upon this place, and shall not be
quenched.
But as to the king of Juda that sent you to beseech the Lord,
thus shall you say to him: Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel:
And thy heart was softened, and thou hast humbled thyself in the
sight of God for the things that are spoken against this place, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and reverencing my face, hast rent thy
garments, and wept before me: I also have heard thee, saith the Lord.
For now I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
brought to thy tomb in peace: and thy eyes shall not see all the evil
that I will bring upon this place, and the inhabitants thereof.  They
therefore reported to the king all that she had said.
And he called together all the ancients of Juda and Jerusalem.
And went up to the house of the Lord, and all the men of Juda,
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests and the Levites, and all
the people from the least to the greatest. And the king read in their
hearing, in the house of the Lord, all the words of the book.
And standing up in his tribunal, he made a covenant before the
justifications with all his heart, and with all his soul, and to do the
things that were written in that book which he had read.
And he adjured all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to
do the same: and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the
covenant of the Lord the God of their fathers.
And Josias took away all the abominations out of all the
countries of the children of Israel and made all that were left in
not from the Lord the God of their fathers.
And Josias kept a phase to the Lord in Jerusalem, and it was
sacrificed on the fourteenth day of the first month.
And he set the priests in their offices, and exhorted them to
minister in the house of the Lord.
And he spoke to the Levites, by whose instruction all Israel was
sanctified to the Lord, saying: Put the ark in the sanctuary of the
temple, which Solomon the son of David king of Israel built: for you
shall carry it no more: but minister now to the Lord your God, and to
his people Israel.
And prepare yourselves by your houses, and families according to
your courses, as David king of Israel commanded, and Solomon his son
hath written.
And serve ye in the sanctuary by the families and companies of
And being sanctified kill the phase, and prepare your brethren,
that they may do according to the words which the Lord spoke by the hand
of Moses.
And Josias gave to all the people that were found there in the
solemnity of the phase, of lambs and of kids of the flocks, and of other
small cattle thirty thousand, and of oxen three thousand, all these were
of the king's substance.
And his princes willingly offered what they had vowed, both to the
people and to the priests and the Levites. Moreover Helcias, and
priests to keep the phase two thousand six hundred small cattle, and
three hundred oxen.
And Chonenias, and Semeias and Nathanael, his brethren, and
rest of the Levites to celebrate the phase five thousand small cattle,
and five hundred oxen.
And the ministry was prepared, and the priests stood in their
office: the Levites also in their companies, according to the king's
commandment.
And the phase was immolated: and the priests sprinkled the blood
with their hand, and the Levites flayed the holocausts:
And they separated them, to give them by the houses and families
of every one, and to be offered to the Lord, as it is written in the
book of Moses, and with the oxen they did in like manner.
And they roasted the phase with fire, according to that which is
written in the law: but the victims of peace offerings they boiled in
caldrons, and kettles, and pots, and they distributed them speedily
among all the people.
And afterwards they made ready for themselves, and for the
priests: for the priests were busied in offering of holocausts and the
fat until night, wherefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for
the priests the sons of Aaron last.
And the singers the sons of Asaph stood in their order, according
to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Idithun, the
prophets of the king: and the porters kept guard at every gate, so as
not to depart one moment from their service, and therefore their
brethren the Levites prepared meats for them.
So all the service of the Lord was duly accomplished that day,
both in keeping the phase and offering holocausts upon the altar of the
And the children of Israel that were found there, kept the phase
at that time, and the feast of unleavened seven days.
There was no phase like to this in Israel, from the days of
a phase as Josias kept, with the priests, and the Levites, and all Juda,
and Israel that were found, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josias was this phase
celebrated.
After that Josias had repaired the temple, Nechao king of Egypt
came up to fight in Charcamis by the Euphrates: and Josias went out to
meet him.
But he sent messengers to him, saying: What have I to do with
thee, O king of Juda? I come not against thee this day, but I fight
against another house, to which God hath commanded me to go in haste:
forbear to do against God, who is with me, lest he kill thee.
Josias would not return, but prepared to fight against him, and
hearkened not to the words of Nechao from the mouth of God, but went to
fight in the field of Mageddo.
And there he was wounded by the archers, and he said to his
servants: Carry me out of the battle, for I am grievously wounded.
And they removed him from the chariot into another, that followed
him after the manner of kings, and they carried him away to Jerusalem,
and he died, and was buried in the monument of his fathers, and all Juda
and Jerusalem mourned for him,
Particularly Jeremias: whose lamentations for Josias all the
singing men and singing women repeat unto this day, and it became like a
law in Israel: Behold it is found written in the Lamentations.
Now the rest of the acts of Josias and of his mercies, according
to what was commanded by the law of the Lord:
And his works first and last, are written in the book of the
kings of Juda and Israel.
Then the people of the land took Joachaz the son of Josias, and
made him king instead of his father in Jerusalem.
Joachaz was three and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned three months in Jerusalem.
And the king of Egypt came to Jerusalem, and deposed him, and
condemned the land in a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
And he made Eliakim his brother king in his stead, over Juda and
him and carried him away into Egypt.
Joakim was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did evil before the Lord
his God.
Against him came up Nabuchodonosor king of the Chaldeans, and led
him bound in chains into Babylon.
And he carried also thither the vessels of the Lord, and put them
in his temple.
But the rest of the acts of Joakim, and his abominations, which he
wrought, and the things that were found in him, are contained in the
book of the kings of Juda and Israel. And Joachin his son reigned in his
stead.
Joachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
three months and ten days in Jerusalem, and he did evil in the sight of
the Lord.
he was but eight years old; but after his father's death, when he
reigned alone, he was eighteen years old. 4 Kings 24.8.
And at the return of the year, king Nabuchodonosor sent, and
brought him to Babylon, carrying away at the same time the most precious
vessels of the house of the Lord: and he made Sedecias his uncle king
over Juda and Jerusalem.
Sedecias was one and twenty years old when he began to reign: and
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.
And he did evil in the eyes of the Lord his God, and did not
reverence the face of Jeremias the prophet speaking to him from the
mouth of the Lord.
He also revolted from king Nabuchodonosor, who had made him swear
by God: and he hardened his neck and his heart, from returning to the
Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people wickedly
transgressed according to all the abominations of the Gentiles: and they
defiled the house of the Lord, which he had sanctified to himself in
And the Lord the God of their fathers sent to them, by the hand
of his messengers, rising early, and daily admonishing them: because he
spared his people and his dwelling place.
But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,
and misused the prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, and there was no remedy.
For he brought upon them the king of the Chaldeans, and he slew
their young men with the sword in the house of his sanctuary, he had no
compassion on young man, or maiden, old man or even him that stooped for
age, but he delivered them all into his hands.
And all the vessels of the house of Lord, great and small, and
the treasures of the temple and of the king, and of the princes he
carried away to Babylon.
And the enemies set fire to the house of God, and broke down the
wall of Jerusalem, burnt all the towers, and what soever was precious
they destroyed.
Whosoever escaped the sword, was led into Babylon, and there
served the king and his sons, till the reign of the king of Persia,
That the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias might be
fulfilled, and the land might keep her sabbaths: for all the days of the
desolation she kept a sabbath, till the seventy years were expired.
But in the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, to fulfil
the word of the Lord, which he had spoken by the mouth of Jeremias, the
it to be proclaimed through all his kingdom, and by writing also,
saying:
Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians: All the kingdoms of the
earth hath the Lord the God of heaven given to me, and he hath charged
me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judea: who is there
among you of all his people? The Lord his God be with him, and let him
go up.
doctor of the law. He is called by the Hebrews, Ezra.
