saved by preaching of the cross, and not by human wisdom or eloquence.
Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God,
and Sosthenes a brother,
To the church of God that is at Corinth, to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that invoke
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place of theirs and ours.
Grace to you and peace, from God our father and from the Lord Jesus
I give thanks to my God always for you, for the grace of God that
is given you in Christ Jesus:
That in all things you are made rich in him, in all utterance and
in all knowledge;
As the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you,
So that nothing is wanting to you in any grace, waiting for the
manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Who also will confirm you unto the end without crime, in the days
of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful: by whom you are called unto the fellowship of his
Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you all speak the same thing and that there be no schisms among
you: but that you be perfect in the same mind and in the same judgment.
For it hath been signified unto me, my brethren, of you, by them
that are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.
Now this I say, that every one of you saith: I indeed am of Paul;
and I am of Apollo; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.
Is Christ divided? Was Paul then crucified for you? Or were you
baptized in the name of Paul?
I give God thanks, that I baptized none of you but Crispus and
Lest any should say that you were baptized in my name.
And I baptized also the household of Stephanus. Besides, I know
not whether I baptized any other.
For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not
in wisdom of speech, lest the cross of Christ should be made void.
For the word of the cross, to them indeed that perish, is
foolishness: but to them that are saved, that is, to us, it is the power
of God.
For it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise: and the
prudence of the prudent I will reject.
Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of
this world? Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
For, seeing that in the wisdom of God, the world, by wisdom, knew
not God, it pleased God, by the foolishness of our preaching, to save
them that believe.
For both the Jews require signs: and the Greeks seek after wisdom.
But we preach Christ crucified: unto the Jews indeed a
stumblingblock, and unto the Gentiles foolishness:
But unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the
power of God and the wisdom of God.
For the foolishness of God is wiser than men: and the weakness of
world in the ways of God, is indeed most wise; and what appears weak is
indeed above all the strength and comprehension of man.
For see your vocation, brethren, that there are not many wise
according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble.
But the foolish things of the world hath God chosen, that he may
confound the wise: and the weak things of the world hath God chosen,
that he may confound the strong.
And the base things of the world and the things that are
contemptible, hath God chosen: and things that are not, that he might
bring to nought things that are:
That no flesh should glory in his sight.
But of him are you in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom and justice and sanctification and redemption:
That, as it is written: He that glorieth may glory in the Lord.
sensual man, but only by the spiritual man.
And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not in loftiness of
speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of Christ.
For I judged not myself to know anything among you, but Jesus
And I was with you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling.
And my speech and my preaching was not in the persuasive words of
human wisdom, but in shewing of the Spirit and power:
That your faith might not stand on the wisdom of men, but on the
power of God.
Howbeit we speak wisdom among the perfect: yet not the wisdom of
this world, neither of the princes of this world that come to nought.
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, a wisdom which is
hidden, which God ordained before the world, unto our glory:
Which none of the princes of this world knew. For if they had known
it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory.
But, as it is written: That eye hath not seen, nor ear heard:
neither hath it entered into the heart of man, what things God hath
prepared for them that love him.
But to us God hath revealed them by his Spirit. For the Spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.
For what man knoweth the things of a man, but the spirit of a man
that is in him? So the things also that are of God, no man knoweth, but
the Spirit of God.
Now, we have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit
that is of God: that we may know the things that are given us from God.
Which things also we speak: not in the learned words of human
wisdom, but in the doctrine of the Spirit, comparing spiritual things
with spiritual.
But the sensual man perceiveth not these things that are of the
because it is spiritually examined.
is taken up with sensual pleasures, with carnal and worldly affections;
or he who measureth divine mysteries by natural reason, sense, and human
wisdom only. Now such a man has little or no notion of the things of
takes not human sense for his guide: but submits his judgment to the
decisions of the church, which he is commanded to hear and obey. For
and to direct her in all things by the Spirit of truth.
But the spiritual man judgeth all things: and he himself is judged
of no man.
For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him?
and accountable to him. Their works shall be tried by fire.
And I, brethren, could not speak to you as unto spiritual, but as
unto carnal. As unto little ones in Christ.
I gave you milk to drink, not meat: for you were not able as yet.
For, whereas there is among you envying and contention, are you not
carnal and walk you not according to man?
For while one saith: I indeed am of Paul: and another: I am of
The ministers of him whom you have believed: and to every one as
the Lord hath given.
I have planted, Apollo watered: but God gave the increase.
Therefore, neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that
watereth: but God that giveth the increase.
Now he that planteth and he that watereth, are one. And every man
shall receive his own reward, according to his own labour.
For we are God's coadjutors. You are God's husbandry: you are God's
building.
According to the grace of God that is given to me, as a wise
architect, I have laid the foundation: and another buildeth thereon. But
let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.
For other foundation no man can lay, but that which is laid: which
is Christ Jesus.
Now, if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble:
the true faith in him, working through charity. The building upon this
foundation gold, silver, and precious stones, signifies the more perfect
preaching and practice of the gospel; the wood, hay, and stubble, such
preaching as that of the Corinthian teachers (who affected the pomp of
words and human eloquence) and such practice as is mixed with much
imperfection, and many lesser sins. Now the day of the Lord, and his
fiery trial, (in the particular judgment immediately after death,) shall
make manifest of what sort every man's work has been: of which, during
this life, it is hard to make a judgment. For then the fire of God's
judgment shall try every man's work. And they, whose works, like wood,
hay, and stubble, cannot abide the fire, shall suffer loss; these works
being found to be of no value; yet they themselves, having built upon
the right foundation, (by living and dying in the true faith and in the
state of grace, though with some imperfection,) shall be saved yet so as
by fire; being liable to this punishment, by reason of the wood, hay,
and stubble, which was mixed with their building.
Every man's work shall be manifest. For the day of the Lord shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed in fire. And the fire shall try
every man's work, of what sort it is.
If any man's work abide, which he hath built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward.
If any mans work burn, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall
be saved, yet so as by fire.
Know you not that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of
But if any man violate the temple of God, him shall God destroy.
Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seem to be wise
in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is
written: I will catch the wise in their own craftiness.
And again: The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they
are vain.
Let no man therefore glory in men.
For all things are yours, whether it be Paul or Apollo or Cephas,
or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come.
And you are Christ's. And Christ is God's.
their preachers and describes the treatment the apostles every where met
with.
Let a man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ and the
dispensers of the mysteries of God.
Here now it is required among the dispensers that a man be found
faithful.
But to me it is a very small thing to be judged by you or by man's
day. But neither do I judge my own self.
For I am not conscious to myself of anything. Yet am I not hereby
justified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord.
Therefore, judge not before the time: until the Lord come, who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts. And then shall every man have praise from
But these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to
myself and to Apollo, for your sakes: that in us you may learn that one
be not puffed up against the other for another, above that which is
written.
For who distinguisheth thee? Or what hast thou that thou hast not
received, and if thou hast received, why dost thou glory, as if thou
hadst not received it?
You are now full: you are now become rich: you reign without us;
and I would to God you did reign, that we also might reign with you.
For I think that God hath set forth us apostles, the last, as it
were men appointed to death. We are made a spectacle to the world and to
angels and to men.
We are fools for Christs sake, but you are wise in Christ: we are
weak, but you are strong: you are honourable, but we without honour.
Even unto this hour we both hunger and thirst and are naked and
are buffeted and have no fixed abode.
And we labour, working with our own hands. We are reviled: and we
bless. We are persecuted: and we suffer it.
We are blasphemed: and we entreat. We are made as the refuse of
this world, the offscouring of all, even until now.
I write not these things to confound you: but I admonish you as my
dearest children.
For if you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many
fathers. For in Christ Jesus, by the gospel, I have begotten you.
Wherefore, I beseech you, be ye followers of me as I also am of
For this cause have I sent to you Timothy, who is my dearest son
and faithful in the Lord. Who will put you in mind of my ways, which are
in Christ Jesus: as I teach every where in every church.
As if I would not come to you, so some are puffed up.
But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will: and will know,
not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power.
For the kingdom of God is not in speech, but in power.
What will you? Shall I come to you with a rod? Or in charity and
in the spirit of meekness?
out the old leaven.
It is absolutely heard that there is fornication among you and such
fornication as the like is not among the heathens: that one should have
his father's wife.
And you are puffed up and have not rather mourned: that he might be
taken away from among you that hath done this thing.
I indeed, absent in body but present in spirit, have already
judged, as though I were present, him that hath so done,
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together
and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus:
To deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Your glorying is not good. Know you not that a little leaven
corrupteth the whole lump?
Purge out the old leaven, that you may be a new paste, as you are
unleavened. For Christ our pasch is sacrificed.
Therefore, let us feast, not with the old leaven, nor with the
leaven of malice and wickedness: but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth.
I wrote to you in an epistle not to keep company with fornicators.
I mean not with the fornicators of this world or with the covetous
or the extortioners or the servers of idols: otherwise you must needs go
out of this world.
But now I have written to you, not to keep company, if any man
that is named a brother be a fornicator or covetous or a server of idols
or a railer or a drunkard or an extortioner: with such a one, not so
much as to eat.
For what have I to do to judge them that are without? Do not you
judge them that are within?
For them that are without, God will judge. Put away the evil one
from among yourselves.
from the kingdom of heaven. The evil of fornication.
Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to be judged
before the unjust: and not before the saints?
Know you not that the saints shall judge this world? And if the
world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest
matters?
Know you not that we shall judge angels? How much more things of
this world?
If therefore you have judgments of things pertaining to this world,
set them to judge who are the most despised in the church.
I speak to your shame. Is it so that there is not among you any one
wise man that is able to judge between his brethren?
But brother goeth to law with brother: and that before unbelievers.
Already indeed there is plainly a fault among you, that you have
law suits one with another. Why do you not rather take wrong? Why do you
not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?
or the other; and oftentimes on both sides.
But you do wrong and defraud: and that to your brethren.
Know you not that the unjust shall not possess the kingdom of God?
Nor the effeminate nor liers with mankind nor thieves nor covetous
nor drunkards nor railers nor extortioners shall possess the kingdom of
And such some of you were. But you are washed: but you are
sanctified: but you are justified: in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
and the Spirit of our God.
All things are lawful to me: but all things are not expedient. All
things are lawful to me: but I will not be brought under the power of
any.
lawful, inasmuch as they are not prohibited; but oftentimes they are not
expedient; as in the case of lawsuits, etc. And much less would it be
expedient to be enslaved by an irregular affection to any thing, how
indifferent soever.
Meat for the belly and the belly for the meats: but God shall
destroy both it and them. But the body is not for fornication, but for
the Lord: and the Lord for the body.
Now God hath raised up the Lord and will raise us up also by his
power.
Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ?  Shall I
then take the members of Christ and make them the members of an harlot?
Or know you not that he who is joined to a harlot is made one
body? For they shall be, saith he, two in one flesh.
But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
Fly fornication. Every sin that a man doth is without the body:
but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body.
Or know you not that your members are the temple of the Holy
For you are bought with a great price. Glorify and bear God in
your body.
married state.
Now concerning the things whereof you wrote to me: It is good for a
man not to touch a woman.
But for fear of fornication, let every man have his own wife: and
let every woman have her own husband.
meaning is not to exhort the unmarried to marry: on the contrary, he
would have them rather continue as they are, (Ver.  7:8.) But he speaks
here to them that are already married; who must not depart from one
another, but live together as they ought to do in the marriage state.
Let the husband render the debt to his wife: and the wife also in
like manner to the husband.
The wife hath not power of her own body: but the husband.  And in
like manner the husband also hath not power of his own body: but the
wife.
Defraud not one another, except, perhaps, by consent, for a time,
that you may give yourselves to prayer: and return together again, lest
But I speak this by indulgence, not by commandment.
For I would that all men were even as myself. But every one hath
his proper gift from God: one after this manner, and another after that.
But I say to the unmarried and to the widows: It is good for them
if they so continue, even as I.
But if they do not contain themselves, let them marry. For it is
better to marry than to be burnt.
not of such as, by vow, have given their first faith to God; to whom if
they will use proper means to obtain it, God will never refuse the gift
of continency. Some translators have corrupted this text, by rendering
it, if they cannot contain.
But to them that are married, not I, but the Lord, commandeth that
the wife depart not from her husband.
And if she depart, that she remain unmarried or be reconciled to
her husband. And let not the husband put away his wife.
For to the rest I speak, not the Lord. If any brother hath a wife
that believeth not and she consent to dwell with him: let him not put
her away.
And if any woman hath a husband that believeth not and he consent
to dwell with her: let her not put away her husband.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife:
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband.
the wife is of itself sufficient to put the unbelieving party, or their
children, in the state of grace and salvation; but that it is very often
an occasion of their sanctification, by bringing them to the true faith.
But if the unbeliever depart, let him depart. For a brother or
sister is not under servitude in such cases. But God hath called us in
peace.
For how knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?
But as the Lord hath distributed to every one, as God hath called
every one: so let him walk. And so in all churches I teach.
Is any man called, being circumcised? Let him not procure
uncircumcision. Is any man called in uncircumcision? Let him not be
circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing: but the
observance of the commandments of God.
Let every man abide in the same calling in which he was called.
Wast thou called, being a bondman? Care not for it: but if thou
mayest be made free, use it rather.
For he that is called in the Lord, being a bondman, is the freeman
of the Lord. Likewise he that is called, being free, is the bondman of
You are bought with a price: be not made the bondslaves of men.
Brethren, let every man, wherein he was called, therein abide with
Now, concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord: but I
give counsel, as having obtained mercy of the Lord, to be faithful.
I think therefore that this is good for the present necessity:
that it is good for a man so to be.
Art thou bound to a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed
from a wife? Seek not a wife.
But if thou take a wife, thou hast not sinned. And if a virgin
marry, she hath not sinned: nevertheless, such shall have tribulation of
the flesh. But I spare you.
This therefore I say, brethren: The time is short. It remaineth,
that they also who have wives be as if they had none:
And they that weep, as though they wept not: and they that
rejoice, as if they rejoiced not: and they that buy as if they possessed
not:
And they that use this world, as if they used it not. For the
fashion of this world passeth away.
But I would have you to be without solicitude. He that is without
a wife is solicitous for the things that belong to the Lord: how he may
please God.
But he that is with a wife is solicitous for the things of the
world: how he may please his wife. And he is divided.
And the unmarried woman and the virgin thinketh on the things of
the Lord: that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But she that
is married thinketh on the things of the world: how she may please her
husband.
And this I speak for your profit, not to cast a snare upon you,
but for that which is decent and which may give you power to attend upon
the Lord, without impediment.
But if any man think that he seemeth dishonoured with regard to
his virgin, for that she is above the age, and it must so be: let him do
what he will. He sinneth not if she marry.
libertines would have it, that persons may do what they will and not
sin, provided they afterwards marry; but that the father, with regard to
the giving his virgin in marriage, may do as he pleaseth; and that it
will be no sin to him if she marry.
For he that hath determined, being steadfast in his heart, having
no necessity, but having power of his own will: and hath judged this in
his heart, to keep his virgin, doth well.
Therefore both he that giveth his virgin in marriage doth well:
and he that giveth her not doth better.
A woman is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth: but if
her husband die, she is at liberty. Let her marry to whom she will: only
in the Lord.
But more blessed shall she be, if she so remain, according to my
counsel. And I think that I also have the spirit of God.
eaten, for fear of scandal.
Now concerning those things that are sacrificed to idols: we know
we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up: but charity edifieth.
serveth only to puff persons up.
And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he hath not yet
known as he ought to know.
But if any man love God, the same is known by him.
But as for the meats that are sacrificed to idols, we know that an
idol is nothing in the world and that there is no God but one.
For although there be that are called gods, either in heaven or on
earth (for there be gods many and lords many):
Yet to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and we unto him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him.
But there is not knowledge in every one. For some until this
present, with conscience of the idol, eat as a thing sacrificed to an
idol: and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
But meat doth not commend us to God. For neither, if we eat, shall
we have the more: nor, if we eat not, shall we have the less.
But take heed lest perhaps this your liberty become a
stumblingblock to the weak.
For if a man see him that hath knowledge sit at meat in the idol's
temple, shall not his conscience, being weak, be emboldened to eat those
things which are sacrificed to idols?
And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom
Now when you sin thus against the brethren and wound their weak
conscience, you sin against Christ.
Wherefore, if meat scandalize my brother, I will never eat flesh,
lest I should scandalize my brother.
charges of those to whom he preached, that he might give no hindrance to
the gospel. Of running in the race and striving for the mastery.
Am I not I free? Am not I an apostle? Have not I seen Christ Jesus
our Lord? Are not you my work in the Lord?
And if unto others I be not an apostle, but yet to you I am.  For
you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
My defence with them that do examine me is this.
Have not we power to eat and to drink?
Have we not power to carry about a woman, a sister as well as the
rest of the apostles and the brethren of the Lord and Cephas?
by rendering it, a sister, a wife: whereas, it is certain, St. Paul had
no wife (chap. 7 ver. 7, 8) and that he only speaks of such devout
women, as, according to the custom of the Jewish nation, waited upon the
preachers of the gospel, and supplied them with necessaries.
Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to do this?
Who serveth as a soldier, at any time, at his own charges?  Who
planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit thereof?  Who feedeth
the flock and eateth not of the milk of the flock?
Speak I these things according to man? Or doth not the law also
say; these things?
For it is written in the law of Moses: Thou shalt not muzzle the
mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen?
Or doth he say this indeed for our sakes? For these things are
written for our sakes: that he that plougheth, should plough in hope and
he that thrasheth, in hope to receive fruit.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if
we reap your carnal things?
If others be partakers of this power over you, why not we rather?
we should give any hindrance to the gospel of Christ.
Know you not that they who work in the holy place eat the things
that are of the holy place; and they that serve the altar partake with
the altar?
So also the Lord ordained that they who preach the gospel should
live by the gospel.
But I have used none of these things. Neither have I written these
things, that they should be so done unto me: for it is good for me to
die rather than that any man should make my glory void.
For if I preach the gospel, it is no glory to me: for a necessity
lieth upon me. For woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel.
For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against
my will, a dispensation is committed to me.
What is my reward then? That preaching the gospel, I may deliver
the gospel without charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel.
For whereas I was free as to all, I made myself the servant of
all, that I might gain the more.
And I became to the Jews a Jew, that I might gain the Jews:
To them that are under the law, as if I were under the law,
(whereas myself was not under the law,) that I might gain them that
were under the law. To them that were without the law, as if I were
without the law, (whereas I was not without the law of God, but was
in the law of Christ) that I might gain them that were without the law.
To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak. I became
all things to all men, that I might save all.
And I do all things for the gospel's sake, that I may be made
partaker thereof.
Know you not that they that run in the race, all run indeed, but
one receiveth the prize. So run that you may obtain.
And every one that striveth for the mastery refraineth himself
from all things. And they indeed that they may receive a corruptible
crown: but we an incorruptible one.
I therefore so run, not as at an uncertainty: I so fight, not as
one beating the air.
But I chastise my body and bring it into subjection: lest perhaps,
when I have preached to others, I myself should become a castaway.
mortification, to subdue the flesh, and its inordinate desires.
much upon favours received but to avoid their sins and fly from the
service of idols and from things offered to idols.
For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that our fathers were
all under the cloud: and all passed through the sea.
And all in Moses were baptized, in the cloud and in the sea:
by passing under the cloud, and through the sea; and they partook of the
body and blood of Christ in figure, by eating of the manna, (called here
a spiritual food because it was a figure of the true bread which comes
down from heaven,) and drinking the water, miraculously brought out of
the rock, called here a spiritual rock, because it was also a figure of
And did all eat the same spiritual food:
And all drank the same spiritual drink: (And they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them: and the rock was Christ.)
But with most of them God was not well pleased: for they were
overthrown in the desert.
Now these things were done in a figure of us, that we should not
covet evil things, as they also coveted.
Neither become ye idolaters, as some of them, as it is written:
Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them that committed
fornication: and there fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted and perished
by the serpent.
Neither do you murmur, as some of them murmured and were
destroyed by the destroyer.
Now all these things happened to them in figure: and they are
written for our correction, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
Wherefore, he that thinketh himself to stand, let him take heed
lest he fall.
Let no temptation take hold on you, but such as is human.  And
you are able: but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be
able to bear it.
but what is human, or incident to man. Issue... or a way to escape.
Wherefore, my dearly beloved, fly from the service of idols.
I speak as to wise men: judge ye yourselves what I say.
The chalice of benediction which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, is it
not the partaking of the body of the Lord?
of the body and blood of Christ in the sacred mysteries, and becoming
thereby one mystical body with Christ.  From whence he infers, ver. 21,
that they who are made partakers with Christ, by the eucharistic
sacrifice and sacrament, must not be made partakers with devils by
eating of the meats sacrificed to them.
For we, being many, are one bread, one body: all that partake of
one bread.
partake of that one bread. For it is by our communicating with Christ,
and with one another, in this blessed sacrament, that we are formed into
one mystical body; and made, as it were, one bread, compounded of many
grains of corn, closely united together.
Behold Israel according to the flesh. Are not they that eat of
the sacrifices partakers of the altar?
What then? Do I say that what is offered in sacrifice to idols is
any thing? Or that the idol is any thing?
But the things which the heathens sacrifice, they sacrifice to
devils and not to God. And I would not that you should be made partakers
with devils.
You cannot drink the chalice of the Lord and the chalice of
devils: you cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord and of the
table of devils.
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?  All
things are lawful for me: but all things are not expedient.
All things are lawful for me: but all things do not edify.
Let no man seek his own, but that which is another's.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat: asking no question for
conscience' sake.
The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof.
If any of them that believe not, invite you, and you be willing
to go: eat of any thing that is set before you, asking no question for
conscience' sake.
But if any man say: This has been sacrificed to idols: do not eat
of it, for his sake that told it and for conscience' sake.
Conscience I say, not thy own, but the other's. For why is my
liberty judged by another man's conscience?
If I partake with thanksgiving, why am I evil spoken of for that
for which I give thanks?
Therefore, whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do,
do all to the glory of God.
Be without offence to the Jew, and to the Gentiles and to the
church of God:
As I also in all things please all men, not seeking that which is
profitable to myself but to many: that they may be saved.
their love feasts and upon that occasion treats of the Blessed
Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ.
Now I praise you, brethren, that in all things you are mindful of
me and keep my ordinances as I have delivered them to you.
But I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ:
and the head of the woman is the man: and the head of Christ is God.
Every man praying or prophesying with his head covered disgraceth
his head.
But every woman praying or prophesying with her head not covered
disgraceth her head: for it is all one as if she were shaven.
For if a woman be not covered, let her be shorn. But if it be a
shame to a woman to be shorn or made bald, let her cover her head.
The man indeed ought not to cover his head: because he is the
image and glory of God. But the woman is the glory of the man.
For the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man.
For the man was not created for the woman: but the woman for the
man.
Therefore ought the woman to have a power over her head, because
of the angels.
power of her husband: and this, the apostle adds, because of the angels,
who are present in the assemblies of the faithful.
But yet neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman
without the man, in the Lord.
For as the woman is of the man, so also is the man by the woman:
but all things of God.
You yourselves judge. Doth it become a woman to pray unto God
uncovered?
Doth not even nature itself teach you that a man indeed, if he
nourish his hair, it is a shame unto him?
But if a woman nourish her hair, it is a glory to her; for her
hair is given to her for a covering.
But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
nor the Church of God.
Now this I ordain: not praising you, that you come together, not
for the better, but for the worse.
For first of all I hear that when you come together in the
church, there are schisms among you. And in part I believe it.
For there must be also heresies: that they also, who are approved
may be made manifest among you.
man's heart; not by God's will or appointment; who nevertheless draws
good out of this evil, manifesting, by that occasion, who are the good
and firm Christians, and making their faith more remarkable.
When you come therefore together into one place, it is not now to
eat the Lord's supper.
observed by the primitive Christians; and reprehends the abuses of the
these feasts were accompanied with the celebrating of the eucharistic
sacrifice and sacrament.
For every one taketh before his own supper to eat. And one indeed
is hungry and another is drunk.
What, have you no houses to eat and to drink in? Or despise ye
the church of God and put them to shame that have not? What shall I say
to you? Do I praise you? In this I praise you not.
For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took
bread,
And giving thanks, broke and said: Take ye and eat: This is my
body, which shall be delivered for you. This do for the commemoration of
me.
In like manner also the chalice, after he had supped, saying:
you shall drink, for the commemoration of me.
For as often as you shall eat this bread and drink the chalice,
you shall shew the death of the Lord, until he come.
Therefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink the chalice
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and of the blood of
the Lord.
and drink (contrary to the original) instead of or drink.
demonstrates the real presence of the body and blood of Christ, even to
the unworthy communicant; who otherwise could not be guilty of the body
and blood of Christ, or justly condemned for not discerning the Lord's
body.
But let a man prove himself: and so let him eat of that bread and
drink of the chalice.
of allowance, viz., where and when it is agreeable to the practice and
discipline of the church.
For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily eateth and drinketh
judgment to himself, not discerning the body of the Lord.
Therefore are there many infirm and weak among you: and many
sleep.
But if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.
But whilst we are judged, we are chastised by the Lord, that we
be not condemned with this world.
Wherefore, my brethren, when you come together to eat, wait for
one another.
If any man be hungry, let him eat at home; that you come not
together unto judgment. And the rest I will set in order, when I come.
like those of the natural body, must mutually cherish one another.
Now concerning spiritual things, my brethren, I would not have you
ignorant.
You know that when you were heathens, you went to dumb idols,
according as you were led.
Wherefore, I give you to understand that no man, speaking by the
Now there are diversities of graces, but the same Spirit.
And there are diversities of ministries, but the same Lord.
And there are diversities of operations, but the same God, who
worketh all in all.
And the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man unto
profit.
To one indeed, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom: and to
another, the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit:
To another, faith in the same spirit: to another, the grace of
healing in one Spirit:
To another the working of miracles: to another, prophecy: to
another, the discerning of spirits: to another, diverse kinds of
tongues: to another, interpretation of speeches.
But all these things, one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing
to every one according as he will.
For as the body is one and hath many members; and all the members
of the body, whereas they are many, yet are one body: So also is Christ.
For in one Spirit were we all baptized into one body, whether
been made to drink.
For the body also is not one member, but many.
If the foot should say: Because I am not the hand, I am not of
the body: Is it therefore not of the Body?
And if the ear should say: Because I am not the eye, I am not of
the body: Is it therefore not of the body?
If the whole body were the eye, where would be the hearing?  If
the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling?
But now God hath set the members, every one of them, in the body
as it hath pleased him.
And if they all were one member, where would be the body?
But now there are many members indeed, yet one body.
And the eye cannot say to the hand: I need not thy help.  Nor
again the head to the feet: I have no need of you.
Yea, much more those that seem to be the more feeble members of
the body are more necessary.
And such as we think to be the less honourable members of the
body, about these we put more abundant honour: and those that are our
uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.
But our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body
together, giving to that which wanted the more abundant honour.
That there might be no schism in the body: but the members might
be mutually careful one for another.
And if one member suffer any thing, all the members suffer with
it: or if one member glory, all the members rejoice with it.
Now you are the body of Christ and members of member.
And God indeed hath set some in the church; first apostles,
secondly prophets, thirdly doctors: after that miracles: then the graces
of healings, helps, governments, kinds of tongues, interpretations of
speeches.
Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all doctors?
Are all workers of miracles? Have all the grace of healing?  Do
all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?
But be zealous for the better gifts. And I shew unto you yet a
more excellent way.
If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
And if I should have prophecy and should know all mysteries and
all knowledge, and if I should have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.
And if I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I
should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth
me nothing.
Charity is patient, is kind: charity envieth not, dealeth not
perversely, is not puffed up,
Is not ambitious, seeketh not her own, is not provoked to anger,
thinketh no evil:
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth with the truth:
Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things,
endureth all things.
Charity never falleth away: whether prophecies shall be made void
or tongues shall cease or knowledge shall be destroyed.
For we know in part: and we prophesy in part.
But when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child,
a child.
We see now through a glass in a dark manner: but then face to
face. Now I know in part: but then I shall know even as I am known.
And now there remain faith, hope, and charity, these three: but
the greatest of these is charity.
strange tongues.
Follow after charity, be zealous for spiritual gifts; but rather
that you may prophesy.
For he that speaketh in a tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto
by them.
But he that prophesieth speaketh to men unto edification and
exhortation and comfort.
He that speaketh in a tongue edifieth himself: but he that
prophesieth, edifieth the church.
And I would have you all to speak with tongues, but rather to
prophesy. For greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
tongues: unless perhaps he interpret, that the church may receive
edification.
But now, brethren, if I come to you speaking with tongues, what
shall I profit you, unless I speak to you either in revelation or in
knowledge or in prophecy or in doctrine?
Even things without life that give sound, whether pipe or harp,
except they give a distinction of sounds, how shall it be known what is
piped or harped?
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
himself to the battle?
So likewise you, except you utter by the tongue plain speech, how
shall it be known what is said? For you shall be speaking into the air.
There are, for example, so many kinds of tongues in this world:
and none is without voice.
If then I know not the power of the voice, I shall be to him to
whom I speak a barbarian: and he that speaketh a barbarian to me.
So you also, forasmuch as you are zealous of spirits, seek to
abound unto the edifying of the church.
And therefore he that speaketh by a tongue, let him pray that he
may interpret.
For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prayeth: but my
understanding is without fruit.
What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also
with the understanding, I will sing with the spirit, I will sing also
with the understanding.
Else, if thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that
holdeth the place of the unlearned say, Amen, to thy blessing? Because
he knoweth not what thou sayest.
be qualified to join with you by saying Amen to your blessing. The use
or abuse of strange tongues, of which the apostle here speaks, does not
regard the public liturgy of the church, (in which strange tongues were
never used,) but certain conferences of the faithful, ver. 26, etc., in
which, meeting together, they discovered to one another their various
miraculous gifts of the Spirit, common in those primitive times; amongst
which the apostle prefers that of prophesying before that of speaking
strange tongues, because it was more to the public edification. Where
also not, that the Latin, used in our liturgy, is so far from being a
strange or unknown tongue, that it is perhaps the best known tongue in
the world.
For thou indeed givest thanks well: but the other is not edified.
I thank my God I speak with all your tongues.
But in the church I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that I may instruct others also: than ten thousand words
in a tongue.
Brethren, do not become children in sense. But in malice be
children: and in sense be perfect.
In the law it is written: In other tongues and other lips I will
speak to this people: and neither so will they hear me, saith the Lord.
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to believers but to
unbelievers: but prophecies, not to unbelievers but to believers.
If therefore the whole church come together into one place, and
all speak with tongues, and there come in unlearned persons or infidels,
will they not say that you are mad?
But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not or
an unlearned person, he is convinced of all: he is judged of all.
The secrets of his heart are made manifest. And so, falling down
on his face, he will adore God, affirming that God is among you indeed.
How is it then, brethren? When you come together, every one of
you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a revelation, hath a tongue,
hath an interpretation: let all things be done to edification.
If any speak with a tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by
three, and in course: and let one interpret.
But if there be no interpreter, let him hold his peace in the
church and speak to himself and to God.
 And let the prophets speak, two or three: and let the rest
judge.
But if any thing be revealed to another sitting, let the first
hold his peace.
For you may all prophesy, one by one, that all may learn and all
may be exhorted.
And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.
For God is not the God of dissension, but of peace: as also I
teach in all the churches of the saints.
Let women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted
them to speak but to be subject, as also the law saith.
But if they would learn anything, let them ask their husbands at
home. For it is a shame for a woman to speak in the church.
Or did the word of God come out from you? Or came it only unto
you?
If any seem to be a prophet or spiritual, let him know the things
that I write to you, that they are the commandments of the Lord.
But if any man know not, he shall not be known.
Wherefore, brethren, be zealous to prophesy: and forbid not to
speak with tongues.
But let all things be done decently and according to order.
Now I make known unto you, brethren, the gospel which I preached
to you, which also you have received and wherein you stand.
By which also you are saved, if you hold fast after what manner I
preached unto you, unless you have believed in vain.
For I delivered unto you first of all, which I also received: how
that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures:
And that he was buried: and that he rose again according to the
scriptures:
And that he was seen by Cephas, and after that by the eleven.
Then was he seen by more than five hundred brethren at once: of
whom many remain until this present, and some are fallen asleep.
After that, he was seen by James: then by all the apostles.
And last of all, he was seen also by me, as by one born out of due
tine.
For I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called
an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
But by the grace of God, I am what I am. And his grace in me hath
not been void: but I have laboured more abundantly than all they. Yet
not I, but the grace of God with me:
For whether I or they, so we preach: and so you have believed.
Now if Christ be preached, that he arose again from the dead, how
do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not
risen again.
And if Christ be not risen again, then is our preaching vain: and
your faith is also vain.
Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God: because we have
given testimony against God, that he hath raised up Christ, whom he hath
not raised up, if the dead rise not again.
For if the dead rise not again, neither is Christ risen again.
And if Christ be not risen again, your faith is vain: for you are
yet in your sins.
Then they also that are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.
But now Christ is risen from the dead, the firstfruits of them
that sleep:
For by a man came death: and by a man the resurrection of the
dead.
And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made
alive.
But every one in his own order: the firstfruits, Christ: then
they that are of Christ, who have believed in his coming.
Afterwards the end: when he shall have delivered up the kingdom
to God and the Father: when he shall have brought to nought all
principality and power and virtue.
For he must reign, until he hath put all his enemies under his
feet.
And the enemy, death, shall be destroyed last: For he hath put
all things under his feet. And whereas he saith:
All things are put under him; undoubtedly, he is excepted, who
put all things under him.
And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then the Son also
himself shall be subject unto him that put all things under him, that
be subject to the Father, according to his human nature, even after the
general resurrection; and also the whole mystical body of Christ will be
entirely subject to God, obeying him in every thing.
Otherwise, what shall they do that are baptized for the dead, if
the dead rise not again at all? Why are they then baptized for them?
a ceremony then in use; but others, more probably, to the prayers and
penitential labours, performed by the primitive Christians for the souls
of the faithful departed; or to the baptism of afflictions and
sufferings undergone for sinners spiritually dead.
Why also are we in danger every hour?
I die daily, I protest by your glory, brethren, which I have in
If (according to man) I fought with beasts at Ephesus, what doth
it profit me, if the dead rise not again? Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die.
to rise again from the dead, we might live like the impious and wicked,
who have no belief in the resurrection.
Be not seduced: Evil communications corrupt good manners.
Awake, ye just, and sin not. For some have not the knowledge of
But some man will say: How do the dead rise again? Or with what
manner of body shall they come?
Senseless man, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
die first.
And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall
be: but bare grain, as of wheat, or of some of the rest.
But God giveth it a body as he will: and to every seed its proper
body.
All flesh is not the same flesh: but one is the flesh of men,
another of beasts, other of birds, another of fishes.
And there are bodies celestial and bodies terrestrial: but, one
is the glory of the celestial, and another of the terrestrial.
One is the glory of the sun, another the glory of the moon, and
another the glory of the stars. For star differeth from star in glory.
So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in
corruption: it shall rise in incorruption.
It is sown in dishonour: it shall rise in glory. It is sown in
weakness: it shall rise in power.
It is sown a natural body: it shall rise a spiritual body.  If
there be a natural body, there is also a spiritual body, as it is
written:
The first man Adam was made into a living soul; the last Adam
into a quickening spirit.
Yet that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is
natural: afterwards that which is spiritual.
The first man was of the earth, earthly: the second man, from
heaven, heavenly.
Such as is the earthly, such also are the earthly: and such as is
the heavenly, such also are they that are heavenly.
Therefore, as we have borne the image of the earthly, let us bear
also the image of the heavenly.
Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot possess the
kingdom of God: neither shall corruption possess incorruption.
Behold, I tell you a mystery. We shall all indeed rise again: but
we shall not all be changed.
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet: for
the trumpet shall sound and the dead shall rise again incorruptible. And
we shall be changed.
For this corruptible must put on incorruption: and this mortal
must put on immortality.
And when this mortal hath put on immortality, then shall come to
pass the saying that is written: Death is swallowed up in victory.
O death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting?
Now the sting of death is sin: and the power of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God, who hath given us the victory through our
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast and unmoveable:
always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labour is
not in vain in the Lord.
Now concerning the collections that are made for the saints: as I
have given order to the churches of Galatia, so do ye also.
On the first day of the week, let every one of you put apart with
himself, laying up what it shall well please him: that when I come, the
collections be not then to be made.
And when I shall be with you, whomsoever you shall approve by
letters, them will I send to carry your grace to Jerusalem.
And if it be meet that I also go, they shall go with me.
Now I will come to you, when I shall have passed through
And with you perhaps I shall abide, or even spend the winter: that
you may bring me on my way whithersoever I shall go.
For I will not see you now by the way: for I trust that I shall
abide with you some time, if the Lord permit.
But I will tarry at Ephesus, until Pentecost.
For a great door and evident is opened unto me: and many
adversaries.
Now if Timothy come, see that he be with you without fear: for he
worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do.
Let no man therefore despise him: but conduct ye him on his way
in peace, that he may come to me. For I look for him with the brethren.
And touching our brother Apollo, I give you to understand that I
much entreated him to come unto you with the brethren: and indeed it was
not his will at all to come at this time. But he will come when he shall
have leisure.
Watch ye: stand fast in the faith: do manfully and be
strengthened.
Let all your things be done in charity.
And I beseech you, brethren, you know the house of Stephanus, and
of Fortunatus, and of Achaicus, that they are the firstfruits of Achaia,
and have dedicated themselves to the ministry of the saints:
That you also be subject to such and to every one that worketh
with us and laboureth.
And I rejoice in the presence of Stephanus and Fortunatus and
supplied.
For they have refreshed both my spirit and yours. Know them,
therefore, that are such.
The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you
much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house, with whom I
also lodge.
All the brethren salute you. Salute one another with a holy kiss.
The salutation of me Paul, with my own hand.
If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema,
maranatha.
accursed. Maran-atha, which, according to St. Jerome and St. Chrysostom,
signify, `The Lord is come' already, and therefore is to be taken as an
admonition to those who doubted of the resurrection, and to put them in
mind that Christ, the judge of the living and the dead, is come already.
punish those with exemplary judgments and punishments, that do not love
the Lord Jesus Christ.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
My charity be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.
admonitions to them in the former and absolves the incestuous man on
doing penance, whom he had before excommunicated for his crime. Hence he
treats of true penance and of the dignity of the ministers of the New
society of infidels. He gives an account of his sufferings and also of
the favours and graces which God hath bestowed on him. This second
from some place in Macedonia.
levity. The constancy and sincerity of his doctrine.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy
our brother: to the church of God that is at Corinth, with all the
saints that are in all Achaia:
Grace unto you and peace from God our Father and from the Lord
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of mercies and the God of all comfort:
Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we also may be able
to comfort them who are in all distress, by the exhortation wherewith we
also are exhorted by God.
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us: so also by Christ
doth our comfort abound.
Now whether we be in tribulation, it is for your exhortation and
salvation: or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation: or
whether we be exhorted, it is for your exhortation and salvation, which
worketh the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer.
That our hope for you may be steadfast: knowing that as you are
partakers of the sufferings, so shall you be also of the consolation.
For we would not have you ignorant, brethren, of our tribulation
which came to us in Asia: that we were pressed out of measure above our
strength, so that we were weary even of life.
But we had in ourselves the answer of death, that we should not
trust in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the dead.
Who hath delivered and doth deliver us out of so great dangers: in
whom we trust that he will yet also deliver us,
You helping withal in prayer for us. That for this gift obtained
for us, by the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many in our
behalf.
For our glory is this: the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity of heart and sincerity of God, and not in carnal wisdom, but
in the grace of God, we have conversed in this world: and more
abundantly towards you.
For we write no other things to you than what you have read and
known. And I hope that you shall know unto the end.
As also you have known us in part, that we are your glory: as you
also are ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And in this confidence I had a mind to come to you before, that
you might have a second grace:
And to pass by you into Macedonia: and again from Macedonia to
come to you, and by you to be brought on my way towards Judea.
Whereas then I was thus minded, did I use lightness? Or, the
things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that there
should be with me, It is, and It is not?
But God is faithful: for our preaching which was to you, was not,
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by
us, by me and Sylvanus and Timothy, was not: It is and It is not. But,
apostles, sometimes, like modern sectaries, saying, It is, and at other
times saying, It is not. But their doctrine was ever the same, one
uniform yea, in Jesus Christ, one Amen, that is, one truth in him.
For all the promises of God are in him, It is. Therefore also by
him, amen to God, unto our glory.
Now he that confirmeth us with you in Christ and that hath
anointed us, is God:
Who also hath sealed us and given the pledge of the Spirit in our
hearts.
But I call God to witness upon my soul that to spare you, I came
not any more to Corinth: not because we exercise dominion over your
faith: but we are helpers of your joy. For in faith you stand.
But I determined this with myself, to come to you again in sorrow.
For if I make you sorrowful, who is he then that can make me glad,
but the same who is made sorrowful by me?
And I wrote this same to you: that I may not, when I come, have
sorrow upon sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice: having
confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all.
For out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote to you
with many tears: not that you should be made sorrowful: but that you
might know the charity I have more abundantly towards you.
And if any one have caused grief, he hath not grieved me: but in
part, that I may not burden you all.
To him who is such a one, this rebuke is sufficient, which is given
by many.
So that on the contrary, you should rather forgive him and comfort
him, lest perhaps such a one be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.
Wherefore, I beseech you that you would confirm your charity
towards him.
For to this end also did I write, that I may know the experiment of
you, whether you be obedient in all things.
And to whom you have pardoned any thing, I also. For, what I have
pardoned, if I have pardoned any thing, for your sakes have I done it in
the person of Christ:
person and by the authority of Christ, to the incestuous Corinthian,
whom before he had put under penance, which pardon consisted in a
releasing of part of the temporal punishment due to his sin.
That we be not overreached by Satan. For we are not ignorant of
his devices.
And when I was come to Troas for the gospel of Christ and a door
was opened unto me in the Lord,
I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother:
but bidding them farewell, I went into Macedonia.
Now thanks be to God, who always maketh us to triumph in Christ
For we are the good odour of Christ unto God, in them that are
saved and in them that perish.
To the one indeed the odour of death unto death: but to the others
the odour of life unto life. And for these things who is so sufficient?
fragrant odour, brought many to life, was to others, through their own
fault, the occasion of death; by their wilfully opposing and resisting
that divine call.
For we are not as many, adulterating the word of God: but with
sincerity: but as from God, before God, in Christ we speak.
Do we begin again to commend ourselves? Or do we need (as some do)
epistles of commendation to you, or from you?
You are our epistle, written in our hearts, which is known and read
by all men:
Being manifested, that you are the epistle of Christ, ministered by
us, and written: not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God: not
in tables of stone but in the fleshly tables of the heart.
And such confidence we have, through Christ, towards God.
Not that we are sufficient to think any thing of ourselves, as of
ourselves: but our sufficiency is from God.
Who also hath made us fit ministers of the new testament, not in
the letter but in the spirit. For the letter killeth: but the spirit
quickeneth.
Now if the ministration of death, engraven with letters upon
stones, was glorious (so that the children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance),
which is made void:
How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather in glory?
For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more the
ministration of justice aboundeth in glory.
For even that which was glorious in this part was not glorified by
reason of the glory that excelleth.
For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remaineth is in glory.
Having therefore such hope, we use much confidence.
And not as Moses put a veil upon his face, that the children of
void.
But their senses were made dull. For, until this present day, the
selfsame veil, in the reading of the old testament, remaineth not taken
away (because in Christ it is made void).
But even until this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon
their heart.
But when they shall be converted to the Lord, the veil shall be
taken away.
Now the Lord is a Spirit. And where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty.
But we all, beholding the glory of the Lord with open face, are
transformed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord.
Therefore seeing we have this ministration, according as we have
obtained mercy, we faint not.
But we renounce the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness nor adulterating the word of God: but by manifestation of the
truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience, in the sight of
And if our gospel be also hid, it is hid to them that are lost,
In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of
unbelievers, that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is
the image of God, should not shine unto them.
For we preach not ourselves, but Jesus Christ our Lord: and
ourselves your servants through Jesus.
For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
may be of the power of God and not of us.
In all things we suffer tribulation: but are not distressed.  We
are straitened: but are not destitute.
We suffer persecution: but are not forsaken. We are cast down: but
we perish not.
Always bearing about in our body the mortification of Jesus, that
the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our bodies.
For we who live are always delivered unto death for Jesus' sake:
that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh.
So then death worketh in us: but life in you.
But having the same spirit of faith, as it is written: I believed,
for which cause I have spoken; we also believe. For which cause we speak
also:
Knowing that he who raised up Jesus will raise us up also with
For all things are for your sakes: that the grace, abounding
through many, may abound in thanksgiving unto the glory of God.
For which cause we faint not: but though our outward man is
corrupted, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.
For that which is at present momentary and light of our
tribulation worketh for us above measure, exceedingly an eternal weight
of glory.
While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen. For the things which are seen are temporal: but the
things which are not seen, are eternal.
charity to the Corinthians.
For we know, if our earthly house of this habitation be dissolved,
that we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
heaven.
For in this also we groan, desiring to be clothed upon with our
habitation that is from heaven.
Yet so that we be found clothed, not naked.
For we also, who are in this tabernacle, do groan, being burthened;
because we would not be unclothed, but clothed upon, that that which is
mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Now he that maketh us for this very thing is God, who hath given us
the pledge of the Spirit,
Therefore having always confidence, knowing that while we are in
the body we are absent from the Lord.
(For we walk by faith and not by sight.)
But we are confident and have a good will to be absent rather from
the body and to be present with the Lord.
And therefore we labour, whether absent or present, to please him.
For we must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the proper things of the body, according as
he hath done, whether it be good or evil.
after death, the soul is rewarded or punished according to what it has
done in the body.
Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we use persuasion to men:
but to God we are manifest. And I trust also that in your consciences we
are manifest.
We commend not ourselves again to you, but give you occasion to
glory in our behalf: that you may have somewhat to answer them who glory
in face, and not in heart.
For whether we be transported in mind, it is to God: or whether we
be sober, it is for you.
For the charity of Christ presseth us: judging this, that if one
died for all, then all were dead.
And Christ died for all: that they also who live may not now live
to themselves, but unto him who died for them and rose again.
Wherefore henceforth, we know no man according to the flesh.  And
if we have known Christ according to the flesh: but now we know him so
no longer.
man with regard to his nation, family, kindred, or other natural
qualities or advantages; but only with relation to Christ, and according
to the order of divine charity, in God, and for God. The apostle adds,
that even with respect to Christ himself, he now no longer considers him
according to the flesh, by taking a satisfaction in his being his
countryman; his affection being now purified from all such earthly
considerations.
If then any be in Christ a new creature, the old things are passed
away. Behold all things are made new.
But all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by
For God indeed was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself,
not imputing to them their sins. And he hath placed in us the word of
reconciliation.
For Christ therefore we are ambassadors, God as it were exhorting
by us, for Christ, we beseech you, be reconciled to God.
Him, who knew no sin, he hath made sin for us: that we might be
made the justice of God in him.
associate with unbelievers.
And we helping do exhort you that you receive not the grace of God
in vain.
For he saith: In an accepted time have I heard thee and in the day
of salvation have I helped thee. Behold, now is the acceptable time:
behold, now is the day of salvation.
Giving no offence to any man, that our ministry be not blamed.
But in all things let us exhibit ourselves as the ministers of God,
in much patience, in tribulation, in necessities, in distresses,
In stripes, in prisons, in seditions, in labours, in watchings, in
fastings,
In chastity, in knowledge, in longsuffering, in sweetness, in the
In the word of truth, in the power of God: by the armour of justice
on the right hand and on the left:
By honour and dishonour: by evil report and good report: as
deceivers and yet true: as unknown and yet known:
As dying and behold we live: as chastised and not killed:
As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as needy, yet enriching many:
as having nothing and possessing all things.
Our mouth is open to you, O ye Corinthians: our heart is enlarged.
You are not straitened in us: but in your own bowels you are
straitened.
But having the same recompense (I speak as to my children): be you
also enlarged.
Bear not the yoke with unbelievers. For what participation hath
justice with injustice? Or what fellowship hath light with darkness?
And what concord hath Christ with Belial? Or what part hath the
faithful with the unbeliever?
And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? For you are
the temple of the living God: as God saith: I will dwell in them and
walk among them. And I will be their God: and they shall be my people.
Wherefore: Go out from among them and be ye separate, saith the
And I will receive you. And will be a Father to you: and you shall
be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.
their account.
Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all defilement of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting
sanctification in the fear of God.
Receive us. We have injured no man: we have corrupted no man: we
have overreached no man.
I speak not this to your condemnation. For we have said before that
you are in our hearts: to die together and to live together.
Great is my confidence for you: great is my glorying for you.  I am
filled with comfort: I exceedingly abound with joy in all our
tribulation.
For also, when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest:
but we suffered all tribulation. Combats without: fears within.
But God, who comforteth the humble, comforted us by the coming of
And not by his coming only, but also by the consolation wherewith
he was comforted in you, relating to us your desire, your mourning, your
zeal for me: so that I rejoiced the more.
For although I made you sorrowful by my epistle, I do not repent.
time) did make you sorrowful,
Now I am glad: not because you were made sorrowful, but because you
were made sorrowful unto penance. For you were made sorrowful according
to God, that you might suffer damage by us in nothing.
For the sorrow that is according to God worketh penance, steadfast
unto salvation: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.
For behold this selfsame thing, that you were made sorrowful
according to God, how great carefulness it worketh in you: yea defence,
yea indignation, yea fear, yea desire, yea zeal, yea revenge. In all
things you have shewed yourselves to be undefiled in the matter.
Wherefore although I wrote to you, it was not for his sake that
did the wrong, nor for him that suffered it: but to manifest our
carefulness that we have for you.
Before God: therefore we were comforted. But in our consolation we
did the more abundantly rejoice for the joy of Titus, because his spirit
was refreshed by you all.
And if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I have not been put
to shame: but as we have spoken all things to you in truth, so also our
boasting that was made to Titus is found a truth.
And his bowels are more abundantly towards you: remembering the
obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling you received him.
I rejoice that in all things I have confidence in you.
Now we make known unto you, brethren, the grace of God that hath
been given in the churches of Macedonia.
That in much experience of tribulation, they have had abundance of
joy and their very deep poverty hath abounded unto the riches of their
simplicity.
For according to their power (I bear them witness) and beyond their
power, they were willing:
With much entreaty begging of us the grace and communication of the
ministry that is done toward the saints.
And not as we hoped: but they gave their own selves, first to the
Insomuch, that we desired Titus, that, as he had begun, so also he
would finish among you this same grace.
That as in all things you abound in faith and word and knowledge
and all carefulness, moreover also in your charity towards us: so in
this grace also you may abound.
I speak not as commanding: but by the carefulness of others,
approving also the good disposition of your charity.
For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that being rich he
became poor for your sakes: that through his poverty you might be rich.
And herein I give my advice: for this is profitable for you who
have begun not only to do but also to be willing, a year ago.
Now therefore perform ye it also in deed: that as your mind is
forward to be willing, so it may be also to perform, out of that which
you have.
For if the will be forward, it is accepted according to that which
a man hath: not according to that which he hath not.
For I mean not that others should be eased and you burdened, but
by an equality.
In this present time let your abundance supply their want, that
their abundance also may supply your want: that there may be an
equality,
As it is written: He that had much had nothing over; and he that
had little had no want.
And thanks be to God, who hath given the same carefulness for you
in the heart of Titus.
For indeed he accepted the exhortation: but, being more careful,
of his own will he went unto you.
We have sent also with him the brother whose praise is in the
gospel through all the churches.
And not that only: but he was also ordained by the churches
companion of our travels, for this grace, which is administered by us,
to the glory of the Lord and our determined will:
Avoiding this, lest any man should blame us in this abundance
which is administered by us.
For we forecast what may be good, not only before God but also
before men.
And we have sent with them our brother also, whom we have often
proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent: with much
confidence in you,
Either for Titus, who is my companion and fellow labourer towards
you, or our brethren, the apostles of the churches, the glory of Christ.
Wherefore shew ye to them, in the sight of the churches, the
evidence of your charity and of our boasting on your behalf.
For concerning the ministry that is done towards the saints, it is
superfluous for me to write unto you.
For I know your forward mind: for which I boast of you to the
emulation hath provoked very many.
Now I have sent the brethren, that the thing which we boast of
concerning you be not made void in this behalf, that (as I have said)
you may be ready:
Lest, when the Macedonians shall come with me and find you
unprepared, we (not to say ye) should be ashamed in this matter.
Therefore I thought it necessary to desire the brethren that they
would go to you before and prepare this blessing before promised, to be
ready, so as a blessing, not as covetousness.
Now this I say: He who soweth sparingly shall also reap sparingly:
and he who soweth in blessings shall also reap blessings.
Every one as he hath determined in his heart, not with sadness or
of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver.
And God is able to make all grace abound in you: that ye always,
having all sufficiently in all things, may abound to every good work,
As it is written: He hath dispersed abroad, he hath given to the
poor: his justice remaineth for ever.
And he that ministereth seed to the sower will both give you bread
to eat and will multiply your seed and increase the growth of the fruits
of your justice:
That being enriched in all things, you may abound unto all
simplicity which worketh through us thanksgiving to God.
Because the administration of this office doth not only supply the
want of the saints, but aboundeth also by many thanksgivings in the
By the proof of this ministry, glorifying God for the obedience of
your confession unto the gospel of Christ and for the simplicity of your
communicating unto them and unto all.
And in their praying for you, being desirous of you, because of
the excellent grace of God in you.
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift.
power of his apostleship.
Now I Paul, myself beseech you, by the mildness and modesty of
bold toward you.
But I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present with
that confidence wherewith I am thought to be bold, against some who
reckon us as if we walked according to the flesh.
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war according to the
flesh.
For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty to God,
unto the pulling down of fortifications, destroying counsels,
And every height that exalteth itself against the knowledge of
of Christ:
And having in readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your
obedience shall be fulfilled.
See the things that are according to outward appearance. If any
man trust to himself, that he is Christ's let him think this again with
himself, that as he is Christ's, so are we also.
For if also I should boast somewhat more of our power, which the
should not be ashamed.
But that I may not be thought as it were to terrify you by
epistles,
(For his epistles indeed, say they, are weighty and strong; but
his bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible):
Let such a one think this, that such as we are in word by
epistles when absent, such also we will be indeed when present.
For we dare not match or compare ourselves with some that commend
themselves: but we measure ourselves by ourselves and compare ourselves
with ourselves.
But we will not glory beyond our measure: but according to the
measure of the rule which God hath measured to us, a measure to reach
even unto you.
For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure, as if we reached
not unto you. For we are come as far as to you in the Gospel of Christ.
Not glorying beyond measure in other men's labours: but having
hope of your increasing faith, to be magnified in you according to our
rule abundantly.
Yea, unto those places that are beyond you to preach the gospel:
not to glory in another man's rule, in those things that are made ready
to our hand.
But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.
For not he who commendeth himself is approved: but he, whom God
commendeth.
should be imposed upon by the false apostles.
Would to God you could bear with some little of my folly! But do
bear with me.
speaking is looked upon as a piece of folly and vanity; though the
apostle was constrained to do it, for the good of the souls committed to
his charge.
For I am jealous of you with the jealousy of God. For I have
espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin
to Christ.
But I fear lest, as the serpent seduced Eve by his subtilty, so
your minds should be corrupted and fall from the simplicity that is in
For if he that cometh preacheth another Christ, whom we have not
preached; or if you receive another Spirit, whom you have not received;
or another gospel, which you have not received: you might well bear with
him.
For I suppose that I have done nothing less than the great
apostles.
For although I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge: but in all
things we have been made manifest to you.
Or did I commit a fault, humbling myself that you might be
exalted, because I preached unto you the Gospel of God freely?
I have taken from other churches, receiving wages of them for your
ministry.
And, when I was present with you and wanted, I was chargeable to
no man: for that which was wanting to me, the brethren supplied who came
from Macedonia. And in all things I have kept myself from being
burthensome to you: and so I will keep myself.
The truth of Christ is in me, that this glorying shall not be
broken off in me in the regions of Achaia.
Wherefore? Because I love you not? God knoweth it.
But what I do, that I will do: that I may cut off the occasion
from them that desire occasion: that wherein they glory, they may be
found even as we.
For such false apostles are deceitful workmen, transforming
themselves into the apostles of Christ.
And no wonder: for Satan himself transformeth himself into an
angel of light.
Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers be transformed as
the ministers of justice, whose end shall be according to their works.
I say again (Let no man think me to be foolish: otherwise take me
as one foolish, that I also may glory a little):
That which I speak, I speak not according to God: but as it were
in foolishness, in this matter of glorying.
Seeing that many glory according to the flesh, I will glory also.
For you gladly suffer the foolish: whereas yourselves are wise.
For you suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour
you, if a man take from you, if a man be lifted up, if a man strike you
on the face.
I seek according to dishonour, as if we had been weak in this
part. Wherein if any man dare (I speak foolishly), I dare also.
They are Hebrews: so am I. They are Israelites: so am I.  They
are the seed of Abraham: so am I.
They are the ministers of Christ (I speak as one less wise): I am
more; in many more labours, in prisons more frequently, in stripes above
measure, in deaths often.
Of the Jews five times did I receive forty stripes save one.
Thrice was I beaten with rods: once I was stoned: thrice I
suffered shipwreck: a night and a day I was in the depth of the sea.
In journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers,
in perils from my own nation, in perils from the Gentiles, in perils in
the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils
from false brethren:
In labour and painfulness, in much watchings, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness:
Besides those things which are without: my daily instance, the
solicitude for all the churches.
day.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is scandalized, and I am not
on fire?
If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things that concern my
infirmity.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for
ever, knoweth that I lie not.
At Damascus, the governor of the nation under Aretas the king,
guarded the city of the Damascenes, to apprehend me.
And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall: and
so escaped his hands.
the Corinthians.
If I must glory (it is not expedient indeed) but I will come to
visions and revelations of the Lord.
I know a man in Christ: above fourteen years ago (whether in the
body, I know not, or out of the body, I know not: God knoweth), such a
one caught up to the third heaven.
And I know such a man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I
know not: God knoweth):
That he was caught up into paradise and heard secret words which
it is not granted to man to utter.
For such an one I will glory: but for myself I will glory nothing
but in my infirmities.
For though I should have a mind to glory, I shall not be foolish:
for I will say the truth. But I forbear, lest any man should think of me
above that which he seeth in me, or any thing he heareth from me.
And lest the greatness of the revelations should exalt me, there
was given me a sting of my flesh, an angel of Satan, to buffet me.
For which thing, thrice I besought the Lord that it might depart
from me.
And he said to me: My grace is sufficient for thee: for power is
made perfect in infirmity. Gladly therefore will I glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me.
shines forth in our weakness and infirmity; as the more weak we are of
ourselves, the more illustrious is his grace in supporting us, and
giving us the victory under all trials and conflicts.
For which cause I please myself in my infirmities, in reproaches,
in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ. For when I
am weak, then am I powerful.
I am become foolish. You have compelled me: for I ought to have
been commended by you. For I have no way come short of them that are
above measure apostles, although I be nothing.
Yet the signs of my apostleship have been wrought on you, in all
patience, in signs and wonders and mighty deeds.
For what is there that you have had less than the other churches
but that I myself was not burthensome to you? Pardon me this injury.
Behold now the third time I am ready to come to you and I will
not be burthensome unto you. For I seek not the things that are yours,
but you. For neither ought the children to lay up for the parents, but
the parents for the children.
But I most gladly will spend and be spent myself for your souls:
although loving you more, I be loved less.
But be it so: I did not burthen you: but being crafty, I caught
you by guile.
Did I overreach you by any of them whom I sent to you?
I desired Titus: and I sent with him a brother. Did Titus
overreach you? Did we not walk with the same spirit? Did we not in the
same steps?
Of old, think you that we excuse ourselves to you? We speak
before God in Christ: but all things, my dearly beloved, for your
edification.
For I fear lest perhaps, when I come, I shall not find you such
as I would, and that I shall be found by you such as you would not. Lest
perhaps contentions, envyings, animosities, dissensions, detractions,
whisperings, swellings, seditions, be among you.
Lest again, when I come, God humble me among you: and I mourn
many of them that sinned before and have not done penance for the
uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness that they have committed.
Behold, this is the third time I am coming to you: In the mouth of
two or three witnesses shall every word stand.
I have told before and foretell, as present and now absent, to
them that sinned before and to all the rest, that if I come again, I
will not spare.
Do you seek a proof of Christ that speaketh in me, who towards you
is not weak, but is mighty in you?
For although he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by
the power of God. For we also are weak in him: but we shall live with
him by the power of God towards you.
Try your own selves if you be in the faith: prove ye yourselves.
perhaps you be reprobates?
But I trust that you shall know that we are not reprobates.
Now we pray God that you may do no evil, not that we may appear
approved, but that you may do that which is good and that we may be as
reprobates.
our power in punishing you.
For we can do nothing against the truth: but for the truth.
For we rejoice that we are weak and you are strong. This also we
pray for, your perfection.
Therefore I write these things, being absent, that, being
present, I may not deal more severely, according to the power which the
For the rest, brethren, rejoice, be perfect, take exhortation, be
of one mind, have peace. And the God of grace and of love shall be with
you.
Salute one another with a holy kiss. All the saints salute you.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the charity of God and the
communication of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.
seduced by some false teachers, who had been Jews and who were for
obliging all Christians, even those who had been Gentiles, to observe
circumcision and the other ceremonies of the Mosaical law. In this
their calumny against his mission and apostleship. The subject matter of
this Epistle is much the same as that to the Romans. It was written at
