beware of heretics.
Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James: to them
that are beloved in God the Father and preserved in Jesus Christ and
called.
Mercy unto you and peace: and charity be fulfilled.
Dearly beloved, taking all care to write unto you concerning your
common salvation, I was under a necessity to write unto you: to beseech
you to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints.
For certain men are secretly entered in (who were written of long
ago unto this judgment), ungodly men, turning the grace of our Lord God
into riotousness and denying the only sovereign Ruler and our Lord Jesus
I will therefore admonish you, though ye once knew all things, that
destroy them that believed not.
And the angels who kept not their principality but forsook their
own habitation, he hath reserved under darkness in everlasting chains,
unto the judgment of the great day.
their original dignity.
As Sodom and Gomorrha and the neighbouring cities, in like manner,
having given themselves to fornication and going after other flesh, were
made an example, suffering the punishment of eternal fire.
In like manner, these men also defile the flesh and despise
dominion and blaspheme majesty.
utter blasphemies against the divine majesty.
When Michael the archangel, disputing with the devil, contended
about the body of Moses, he durst not bring against him the judgment of
railing speech, but said: The Lord command thee.
mentioned in holy writ, was originally known by revelation, and
transmitted by tradition. It is thought the occasion of it was, that the
devil would have had the body buried in such a place and manner, as to
be worshipped by the Jews with divine honours. Command thee... or rebuke
thee.
But these men blaspheme whatever things they know not: and what
things soever they naturally know, like dumb beasts, in these they are
corrupted.
Woe unto them! For they have gone in the way of Cain: and after
the error of Balaam they have for reward poured out themselves and have
perished in the contradiction of Core.
the souls of their brethren; the way of Balaam, by putting a scantal
before the people of God, for their own private ends; and the way of
appointment.
These are spots in their banquets, feasting together without fear,
feeding themselves: clouds without water, which are carried about by
winds: trees of the autumn, unfruitful, twice dead, plucked up by the
roots:
Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own confusion:
wandering stars, to whom the storm of darkness is reserved for ever.
Now of these Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied,
saying: Behold, the Lord cometh with thousands of his saints:
book that is since lost.
To execute judgment upon all and to reprove all the ungodly for
all the works of their ungodliness, whereby they have done ungodly: and
for all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against God.
These are murmurers, full of complaints, walking according to
their own desires: and their mouth speaketh proud things, admiring
persons, for gain's sake.
But you, my dearly beloved, be mindful of the words which have
been spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:
faithful to remain steadfast in the belief and practice of what they had
heard from the apostles, who had also foretold that in aftertimes (lit.
in the last time) there should be false teachers, scoffing and
ridiculing all revealed truths, abandoning themselves to their passions
and lusts; who separate themselves from the Catholic communion by
heresies and schisms. Sensual men... carried away and enslaved by the
pleasures of the senses.
Who told you that in the last time there should come mockers,
walking according to their own desires in ungodlinesses.
These are they who separate themselves, sensual men, having not
the Spirit.
But you, my beloved, building yourselves upon your most holy
faith, praying in the Holy Ghost,
Keep yourselves in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our
actions, a spiritual building, founded, 1st, upon faith; 2d, on the love
of God; 3d, upon hope, whilst you are waiting for the mercies of God,
and the reward of eternal life; 4th, joined with the great duty of
prayer.
And some indeed reprove, being judged:
But others save, pulling them out of the fire. And on others have
mercy, in fear, hating also the spotted garment which is carnal.
to practice charity in endeavouring to convert their neighbour, where
they will meet with three sorts of persons: 1st, With persons obstinate
in their errors and sins; these may be said to be already judged and
condemned; they are to be sharply reprehended, reproved, and if possible
convinced of their error. 2d, As to others you must endeavour to save
them, by pulling them, as it were, out of the fire, from the ruin they
stand in great danger of. 3d, You must have mercy on others in fear,
when you see them through ignorance of frailty, in danger of being drawn
into the snares of these heretics; with these you must deal more gently
and mildly, with a charitable compassion, hating always, and teaching
others to hate the carnal garment which is spotted, their sensual and
corrupt manners, that defile both the soul and body.
Now to him who is able to preserve you without sin and to present
you spotless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, in the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ:
To the only God our Saviour through Jesus Christ our Lord, be
glory and magnificence, empire and power, before all ages, and now, and
for all ages of ages. Amen.
praising God, and praying to the only God our Saviour, which may either
signify God the Father, or God as equally agreeing to all the three
persons, who are equally the cause of Christ's incarnation, and man's
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who, being God from eternity,
took upon him our human nature, that he might become our Redeemer.
instructions and admonitions which St. John was commanded to write to
the seven bishops of the churches in Asia. And in the following
chapters, to the end, are contained prophecies of things that are to
come to pass in the Church of Christ, particularly towards the end of
the world, in the time of Antichrist. It was written in Greek, in the
island of Patmos, where St. John was in banishment by order of the cruel
emperor Domitian, about sixty-four years after our Lord's Ascension.
