faith and to eternal life, into which we are to enter by many
tribulations. He exhorts to holiness of life, considering the holiness
of God and our redemption by the blood of Christ.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers dispersed
through Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, elect,
According to the foreknowledge of God the Father, unto the
sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood
of Jesus Christ. Grace unto you and peace be multiplied.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
according to his great mercy hath regenerated us unto a lively hope, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead:
Unto an inheritance, incorruptible, and undefiled and that cannot
fade, reserved in heaven for you,
Who, by the power of God, are kept by faith unto salvation, ready
to be revealed in the last time.
Wherein you shalt greatly rejoice, if now you must be for a little
time made sorrowful in divers temptations:
That the trial of your faith (much more precious than gold which is
tried by the fire) may be found unto praise and glory and honour at the
appearing of Jesus Christ.
Whom having not seen, you love: in whom also now though you see him
not, you believe and, believing, shall rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorified;
Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.
Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and diligently
searched, who prophesied of the grace to come in you.
Searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ in them
did signify, when it foretold those sufferings that are in Christ and
the glories that should follow.
To whom it was revealed that, not to themselves but to you, they
ministered those things which are now declared to you by them that have
preached the gospel to you: the Holy Ghost being sent down from heaven,
on whom the angels desire to look.
Wherefore, having the loins of your mind girt up, being sober,
trust perfectly in the grace which is offered you in the revelation of
As children of obedience, not fashioned according to the former
desires of your ignorance,
But according to him that hath called you, who is holy, be you
also in all manner of conversation holy:
Because it is written: You shall be holy, for I am holy.
And if you invoke as Father him who, without respect of persons,
judgeth according to every one's work: converse in fear during the time
of your sojourning here.
Knowing that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
gold or silver, from your vain conversation of the tradition of your
fathers:
But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and
undefiled.
Foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world, but
manifested in the last times for you:
Who through him are faithful in God who raised him up from the
dead and hath given him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God.
Purifying your souls in the obedience of charity, with a brotherly
love, from a sincere heart love one another earnestly:
Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by
the word of God who liveth and remaineth for ever.
For all flesh is as grass and all the glory thereof as the flower
of grass. The grass is withered and the flower thereof is fallen away.
But the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word
which by the gospel hath been preached unto you.
being now his people, walk worthily of him, with submission to superiors
and patience under sufferings.
Wherefore laying away all malice and all guile and dissimulations
and envies and all detractions,
As newborn babes, desire the rational milk without guile, that
thereby you may grow unto salvation:
If so be you have tasted that the Lord is sweet.
Unto whom coming, as to a living stone, rejected indeed by men but
chosen and made honourable by God:
Be you also as living stones built up, a spiritual house, a holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Wherefore it is said in the scripture: Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect, precious. And he that shall believe in him
shall not be confounded.
To you therefore that believe, he is honour: but to them that
believe not, the stone which the builders rejected, the same is made the
head of the corner:
And a stone of stumbling and a rock of scandal, to them who stumble
at the word, neither do believe, whereunto also they are set.
But you are a chosen generation, a kingly priesthood, a holy
nation, a purchased people: that you may declare his virtues, who hath
called you out of darkness into his marvelous light:
Who in times past were not a people: but are now the people of
Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, to
refrain yourselves from carnal desires which war against the soul,
Having your conversation good among the Gentiles: that whereas
they speak against you as evildoers, they may, by the good works which
they shall behold in you, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Be ye subject therefore to every human creature for God's sake:
whether it be to the king as excelling,
Or to governors as sent by him for the punishment of evildoers and
for the praise of the good.
For so is the will of God, that by doing well you may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men:
As free and not as making liberty a cloak for malice, but as the
servants of God.
Honour all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honour the king.
Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to
the good and gentle but also to the froward.
For this is thankworthy: if, for conscience towards God, a man
endure sorrows, suffering wrongfully.
For what glory is it, if, committing sin and being buffeted for
it, you endure? But if doing well you suffer patiently: this is
thankworthy before God.
For unto this are you called: because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving you an example that you should follow his steps.
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.
Who, when he was reviled, did not revile: when he suffered, he
threatened not, but delivered himself to him that judged him unjustly.
Who his own self bore our sins in his body upon the tree: that we,
being dead to sins, should live to justice: by whose stripes you were
healed.
For you were as sheep going astray: but you are now converted to
the shepherd and bishop of your souls.
seek. Exhortations to divers Virtues.
In like manner also, let wives be subject to their husbands: that,
if any believe not the word, they may be won without the word, by the
conversation of the wives,
Considering your chaste conversation with fear.
Whose adorning, let it not be the outward plaiting of the hair, or
the wearing of gold, or the putting on of apparel:
But the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptibility of a quiet
and a meek spirit which is rich in the sight of God.
For after this manner heretofore, the holy women also who trusted
in God adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands:
As Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters you are,
doing well and not fearing any disturbance.
Ye husbands, likewise dwelling with them according to knowledge,
giving honour to the female as to the weaker vessel and as to the
co-heirs of the grace of life: that your prayers be not hindered.
And in fine, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of
another, being lovers of the brotherhood, merciful, modest, humble:
Not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but
contrariwise, blessing: for unto this are you called, that you may
inherit a blessing.
For he that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.
Let him decline from evil and do good: Let him seek after peace
and pursue it:
Because the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and his ears unto
their prayers but the countenance of the Lord upon them that do evil
things.
And who is he that can hurt you, if you be zealous of good?
But if also you suffer any thing for justice' sake, blessed are
ye. And be not afraid of their fear: and be not troubled.
But sanctify the Lord Christ in your hearts, being ready always to
satisfy every one that asketh you a reason of that hope which is in you.
But with modesty and fear, having a good conscience: that whereas
they speak evil of you, they may be ashamed who falsely accuse your good
conversation in Christ.
For it is better doing well (if such be the will of God) to suffer
than doing ill.
Because Christ also died once for our sins, the just for the
unjust: that he might offer us to God, being put to death indeed in the
flesh, but enlivened in the spirit,
In which also coming he preached to those spirits that were in
prison:
middle state of souls: for these spirits in prison, to whom Christ went
to preach, after his death, were not in heaven; nor yet in the hell of
the damned: because heaven is no prison: and Christ did not go to preach
to the damned.
Which had been some time incredulous, when they waited for the
patience of God in the days of Noe, when the ark was a building: wherein
a few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water.
Whereunto baptism, being of the like form, now saveth you also:
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but, the examination of
a good conscience towards God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
the water by which Noe was saved, because the one was a figure of the
other. Not the putting away, etc... As much as to say, that baptism has
not its efficacy, in order to salvation, from its washing away any
bodily filth or dirt; but from its purging the conscience from sin, when
accompanied with suitable dispositions in the party, to answer the
interrogations made at that time, with relation to faith, the renouncing
of Satan with all his works; and the obedience to God's commandments.
Who is on the right hand of God, swallowing down death that we
might be made heirs of life everlasting: being gone into heaven, the
angels and powers and virtues being made subject to him.
glory of God, to be willing to suffer for Christ.
Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh, be you also armed
with the same thought: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath
ceased from sins:
That now he may live the rest of his time in the flesh, not after
the desires of men but according to the will of God.
For the time past is sufficient to have fulfilled the will of the
wine, revellings, banquetings and unlawful worshipping of idols.
Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them into the
same confusion of riotousness: speaking evil of you.
Who shall render account to him who is ready to judge the living
and the dead.
For, for this cause was the gospel preached also to the dead: That
they might be judged indeed according to men, in the flesh: but may live
according to God, in the Spirit.
But the end of all is at hand. Be prudent therefore and watch in
prayers.
But before all things have a constant mutual charity among
yourselves: for charity covereth a multitude of sins.
Using hospitality one towards another, without murmuring,
As every man hath received grace, ministering the same one to
another: as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
If any man speak, let him speak, as the words of God. If any
minister, let him do it, as of the power which God administereth: that
in all things God may be honoured through Jesus Christ: to whom is glory
and empire for ever and ever. Amen.
Dearly beloved, think not strange the burning heat which is to try
you: as if some new thing happened to you.
But if you partake of the sufferings of Christ, rejoice that, when
his glory shall be revealed, you may also be glad with exceeding joy.
If you be reproached for the name of Christ, you shall be blessed:
for that which is of the honour, glory and power of God, and that which
is his Spirit resteth upon you.
But let none of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or a railer or
coveter of other men's things.
But, if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed: but let him
glorify God in that name.
For the time is, that judgment should begin at the house of God.
the gospel of God?
And if the just man shall scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear?
of the dangers which constantly surround, the temptations of the world,
of the devil, and of our own corrupt nature.
Wherefore let them also that suffer according to the will of God
commend their souls in good deeds to the faithful Creator.
recommends to all humility and watchfulness.
The ancients therefore that are among you, I beseech who am myself
also an ancient and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, as also a
partaker of that glory which is to be revealed in time to come:
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking care of it, not by
constraint but willingly, according to God: not for filthy lucre's sake
but voluntarily:
Neither as lording it over the clergy but being made a pattern of
the flock from the heart.
And when the prince of pastors shall appear, you shall receive a
never fading crown of glory.
In like manner, ye young men, be subject to the ancients. And do
you all insinuate humility one to another: for God resisteth the proud,
but to the humble he giveth grace.
Be you humbled therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt you in the time of visitation:
Casting all your care upon him, for he hath care of you.
Be sober and watch: because your adversary the devil, as a roaring
lion, goeth about seeking whom he may devour.
Whom resist ye, strong in faith: knowing that the same affliction
befalls, your brethren who are in the world.
But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal
glory in Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a little, will himself
perfect you and confirm you and establish you.
To him be glory and empire, for ever and ever. Amen.
By Sylvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I think, I have
written briefly: beseeching and testifying that this is the true grace
of God, wherein you stand.
The church that is in Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth
you. And so doth my son, Mark.
Salute one another with a holy kiss. Grace be to all you who are
in Christ Jesus. Amen.
write to you: and before (chap. 1,): Being assured that the laying away
of this my tabernacle is at hand. This shews, that it was written a very
short time before his martyrdom, which was about thirty-five years after
our Lord's Ascension. In this Epistle he admonishes the faithful to be
mindful of the great gifts they received from God and to join all other
virtues with their faith. He warns them against false teachers, by
describing their practices and foretelling their punishments. He
describes the dissolution of this world by fire and the day of judgment.
secure their salvation.
Simon Peter, servant and apostle of Jesus Christ: to them that have
obtained equal faith with us in the justice of our God and Saviour Jesus
Grace to you and peace be accomplished in the knowledge of God and
of Christ Jesus our Lord.
As all things of his divine power which appertain to life and
godliness are given us through the knowledge of him who hath called us
by his own proper glory and virtue.
By whom he hath given us most great and precious promises: that by
these you may be made partakers of the divine nature: flying the
corruption of that concupiscence which is in the world.
And you, employing all care, minister in your faith, virtue: And in
virtue, knowledge:
And in knowledge, abstinence: and in abstinence, patience: and in
patience, godliness:
And in godliness, love of brotherhood: and in love of brotherhood,
charity.
For if these things be with you and abound, they will make you to
be neither empty nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
For he that hath not these things with him is blind and groping,
having forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
Wherefore, brethren, labour the more, that by good works you may
make sure your calling and election. For doing these things, you shall
not sin at any time.
For so an entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly into the
ever-lasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
For which cause, I will begin to put you always in remembrance of
these things: though indeed you know them and are confirmed in the
present truth.
But I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir
you up by putting you in remembrance.
Being assured that the laying away of this my tabernacle is at
hand, according as our Lord Jesus Christ also hath signified to me.
And I will endeavour that you frequently have after my decease
whereby you may keep a memory of these things.
For we have not by following artificial fables made known to you
the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ: but we were
eyewitnesses of his greatness.
For he received from God the Father honour and glory, this voice
coming down to him from the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him.
And this voice, we heard brought from heaven, when we were with
him in the holy mount.
And we have the more firm prophetical word: whereunto you do well
to attend, as to a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day
dawn and the day star arise in your hearts.
Understanding this first: That no prophecy of scripture is made by
private interpretation.
shows plainly that the scriptures are not to be expounded by any one's
private judgment or private spirit, because every part of the holy
scriptures were written by men inspired by the Holy Ghost, and declared
as such by the Church; therefore they are not to be interpreted but by
the Spirit of God, which he hath left, and promised to remain with his
us, that many of our divines interpret the scriptures: they may do so,
but they do it always with a submission to the judgment of the Church,
and not otherwise.
For prophecy came not by the will of man at any time: but the holy
men of God spoke, inspired by the Holy Ghost.
But there were also false prophets among the people, even as there
shall be among you lying teachers who shall bring in sects of perdition
and deny the Lord who bought them: bringing upon themselves swift
destruction.
And many shall follow their riotousness, through whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of.
And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you. Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not: and
their perdition slumbereth not.
For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but delivered them,
drawn down by infernal ropes to the lower hell, unto torments, to be
reserved unto judgment:
And spared not the original world, but preserved Noe, the eighth
person, the preacher of justice, bringing in the flood upon the world of
the ungodly.
And reducing the cities of the Sodomites and of the Gomorrhites
into ashes, condemned them to be overthrown, making them an example to
those that should after act wickedly,
And delivered just Lot, oppressed by the injustice and lewd
conversation of the wicked:
For in sight and hearing he was just, dwelling among them who from
day to day vexed the just soul with unjust works.
The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly from temptation, but to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be tormented:
And especially them who walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness and despise government: audacious, self willed, they fear
not to bring in sects, blaspheming.
Whereas angels, who are greater in strength and power, bring not
against themselves a railing judgment.
cursing sentence; not even in their conflicts with the evil angels. See
But these men, as irrational beasts, naturally tending to the
snare and to destruction, blaspheming those things which they know not,
shall perish in their corruption:
Receiving the reward of their injustice, counting for a pleasure
the delights of a day: stains and spots, sporting themselves to excess,
rioting in their feasts with you:
which they place all their happiness.
Having eyes full of adultery and of sin that ceaseth not: alluring
unstable souls: having their heart exercised with covetousness: children
of malediction.
Leaving the right way, they have gone astray, having followed the
way of Balaam of Bosor who loved the wages of iniquity,
But had a check of his madness, the dumb beast used to the yoke,
which, speaking with man's voice, forbade the folly of the prophet.
These are fountains without water and clouds tossed with
whirlwinds, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved.
For, speaking proud words of vanity, they allure by the desires of
fleshly riotousness those who for a little while escape, such as
converse in error:
Promising them liberty, whereas they themselves are the slaves of
corruption. For by whom a man is overcome, of the same also he is the
slave.
For if, flying from the pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they be again entangled
in them and overcome: their latter state is become unto them worse than
the former.
For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
justice than, after they have known it, to turn back from that holy
commandment which was delivered to them.
For, that of the true proverb has happened to them: The dog is
returned to his vomit; and: The sow that was washed to her wallowing in
the mire.
sudden dissolution of this world and exhorts to holiness of life.
Behold this second epistle I write to you, my dearly beloved, in
which, I stir up by way of admonition your sincere mind:
That you may be mindful of those words which I told you before from
the holy prophet and of your apostles, of the precepts of the Lord and
Knowing this first: That in the last days there shall come
deceitful scoffers, walking after their own lusts,
Saying: Where is his promise or his coming? For since the time that
the fathers slept, all things continue as they were from the beginning
of the creation.
For this they are wilfully ignorant of: That the heavens were
before, and the earth out of water and through water, consisting by the
word of God:
Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water,
perished.
But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are
kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and
perdition of the ungodly men.
But of this one thing be not ignorant, my beloved, that one day
with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
The Lord delayeth not his promise, as some imagine, but dealeth
patiently for your sake, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should return to penance,
But the day of the Lord shall come as a thief, in which the
heavens shall pass away with great violence and the elements shall be
melted with heat and the earth and the works which are in it shall be
burnt up.
Seeing then that all these things are to be dissolved, what manner
of people ought you to be in holy conversation and godliness?
Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of the Lord, by
which the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements
shall melt with the burning heat?
But we look for new heavens and a new earth according to his
promises, in which justice dwelleth.
Wherefore, dearly beloved, waiting for these things, be diligent
that you may be found before him unspotted and blameless in peace.
And account the longsuffering of our Lord, salvation: as also our
most dear brother Paul, according to the wisdom given him, hath written
to you:
As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in
which are certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, to their own
destruction.
You therefore, brethren, knowing these things before, take heed,
lest being led aside by the error of the unwise, you fall from your own
steadfastness.
But grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
runs throughout the Gospel written by the beloved disciple and
principal mysteries of faith: The mystery of the Trinity and the mystery
of the incarnation of Jesus Christ the Son of God. The sublimity and
excellence of the evangelical doctrine he declares: And this commandment
we have from God, that he, who loveth God, love also his brother (chap.
4,21). And again: For this is the charity of God, that we keep his
commandments, and: His commandments are not heavy (chap. 5,3).  He shews
how to distinguish the children of God from those of the devil: marks
out those who should be called Antichrists: describes the turpitude and
gravity of sin. Finally, he shews how the sinner may hope for pardon. It
was written, according to Baronius' account, sixty-six years after our
