Paul and Sylvanus and Timothy to the church of the Thessalonians:
in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Grace be to you and peace. We give thanks to God always for you
all: making a remembrance of you in our prayers without ceasing,
Being mindful of the work of your faith and labour and charity: and
of the enduring of the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ before God and our
Knowing, brethren, beloved of God, your election:
For our gospel hath not been unto you in word only, but in power
also: and in the Holy Ghost and in much fulness, as you know what manner
of men we have been among you for your sakes.
And you became followers of us and of the Lord: receiving the word
in much tribulation, with joy of the Holy Ghost:
So that you were made a pattern to all that believe in Macedonia
and in Achaia.
For from you was spread abroad the word of the Lord not only in
towards God, is gone forth, so that we need not to speak any thing.
For they themselves relate of us, what manner of entering in we had
unto you: and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and
true God.
And to wait for his Son from heaven (whom he raised up from the
dead), Jesus, who hath delivered us from the wrath to come.
receiving it.
For yourselves know, brethren, our entrance in unto you, that it
was not in vain:
But having suffered many things before and been shamefully treated,
(as you know) at Philippi, we had confidence in our God, to speak unto
you the gospel of God in much carefulness.
For our exhortation was not of error, nor of uncleanness, nor in
deceit.
But as we were approved by God that the gospel should be committed
to us: even so we speak, not as pleasing men but God, who proveth our
hearts.
For neither have we used at any time the speech of flattery, as you
know: nor taken an occasion of covetousness (God is witness):
Nor sought we glory of men, neither of you, nor of others.
Whereas we might have been burdensome to you, as the apostles of
should cherish her children:
So desirous of you, we would gladly impart unto you not only the
gospel of God but also our own souls: because you were become most dear
unto us.
For you remember, brethren, our labour and toil: working night and
day, lest we should be chargeable to any of you, we preached among you
the gospel of God.
You are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and without
blame we have been to you that have believed:
As you know in what manner, entreating and comforting you (as a
father doth his children),
We testified to every one of you that you would walk worthy of
Therefore, we also give thanks to God without ceasing: because,
that when you had received of us the word of the hearing of God, you
received it not as the word of men, but (as it is indeed) the word of
For you, brethren, are become followers of the churches of God
which are in Judea, in Christ Jesus: for you also have suffered the same
things from your own countrymen, even as they have from the Jews:
Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and the prophets, and have
persecuted us, and please not God, and are adversaries to all men;
Prohibiting us to speak to the Gentiles, that they may be saved,
to fill up their sins always: for the wrath of God is come upon them to
the end.
after which God's justice would punish them. For the wrath of God is
come upon them to the end... That is, to continue on them to the end.
But we, brethren, being taken away from you for a short time, in
sight, not in heart, have hastened the more abundantly to see your face
with great desire.
For we would have come unto you, I Paul indeed, once and again:
but Satan hath hindered us.
For what is our hope or joy or crown of glory? Are not you, in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?
For you are our glory and joy.
For which cause, forbearing no longer, we thought it good to remain
at Athens alone.
And we sent Timothy, our brother and the minister of God in the
gospel of Christ, to confirm you and exhort you concerning your faith:
That no man should be moved in these tribulations: for yourselves
know that we are appointed thereunto.
For even when we were with you, we foretold you that we should
suffer tribulations: as also it is come to pass, and you know.
For this cause also, I, forbearing no longer, sent to know your
faith: lest perhaps he that tempteth should have tempted you: and our
labour should be made vain.
But now when Timothy came to us from you and related to us your
faith and charity, and that you have a good remembrance of us always,
desiring to see us as we also to see you:
Therefore we were comforted, brethren, in you, in all our necessity
and tribulation, by your faith.
Because now we live, if you stand in the Lord.
For what thanks can we return to God for you, in all the joy
wherewith we rejoice for you before our God,
Night and day more abundantly praying that we may see your face
and may accomplish those things that are wanting to your faith?
Now God himself and our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct
our way unto you.
And may the Lord multiply you and make you abound in charity
towards one another and towards all men: as we do also towards you,
To confirm your hearts without blame, in holiness, before God and
our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his saints.
resurrection of the dead.
For the rest therefore, brethren, pray and beseech you in the Lord
please God, so also you would walk, that you may abound the more.
For you know what precepts I have given to you by the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, your sanctification: That you should
abstain from fornication:
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honour,
Not in the passion of lust, like the Gentiles that know not God:
And that no man overreach nor circumvent his brother in business:
because the Lord is the avenger of all these things, as we have told you
before and have testified.
For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto
sanctification.
Therefore, he that despiseth these things, despiseth not man, but
But as touching the charity of brotherhood, we have no need to
write to you: for yourselves have learned of God to love one another.
For indeed you do it towards all the brethren in all Macedonia.
And that you use your endeavour to be quiet: and that you do your
own business and work with your own hands, as we commanded you: and that
you walk honestly towards them that are without: and that you want
nothing of any man's.
And we will not have you ignorant brethren, concerning them that
are asleep, that you be not sorrowful, even as others who have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again: even so them who
have slept through Jesus, will God bring with him.
For this we say unto you in the word of the Lord, that we who are
alive, who remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
who have slept.
For the Lord himself shall come down from heaven with commandment
and with the voice of an archangel and with the trumpet of God: and the
dead who are in Christ shall rise first.
Then we who are alive, who are left, shall be taken up together
with them in the clouds to meet Christ, into the air: and so shall we be
always with the Lord.
Wherefore, comfort ye one another with these words.
several duties.
But of the times and moments, brethren, you need not, that we
should write to you:
For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord shall so
come as a thief in the night.
For when they shall say: Peace and security; then shall sudden
destruction come upon them, as the pains upon her that is with child,
and they shall not escape.
But you, brethren, are not in darkness, that the day should
overtake you as a thief.
For all you are the children of light and children of the day: we
are not of the night nor of darkness.
Therefore, let us not sleep, as others do: but let us watch, and be
sober.
For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that are drunk,
are drunk in the night.
But let us, who are of the day, be sober, having on the breast
plate of faith and charity and, for a helmet, the hope of salvation.
For God hath not appointed us unto wrath: but unto the purchasing
of salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who died for us: that, whether we watch or sleep, we may live
together with him.
For which cause comfort one another and edify one another, as you
also do.
And we beseech you, brethren, to know them who labour among you
and are over you in the Lord and admonish you;
That you esteem them more abundantly in charity, for their work's
sake. Have peace with them.
And we beseech you, brethren, rebuke the unquiet: comfort the
feeble minded: support the weak: be patient towards all men.
See that none render evil for evil to any man: but ever follow
that which is good towards each other and towards all men.
Always rejoice.
Pray without ceasing.
In all things give thanks for this is the will of God in Christ
Extinguish not the spirit.
Despise not prophecies.
But prove all things: hold fast that which is good.
From all appearance of evil refrain yourselves.
And may the God of peace himself sanctify you in all things: that
your whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless in the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He is faithful who hath called you, who also will do it.
Brethren, pray for us.
Salute all the brethren with a holy kiss.
I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read to all the holy
brethren.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
the faith of Christ and not to be terrified by the insinuations of false
teachers telling them that the day of judgment was near at hand, as
there must come many signs and wonders before it. He bids them to hold
firm the traditions received from him, whether by word, or by epistle,
and shews them how they may be certain of his letters by the manner he
writes.
advancement in all good.
Paul and Sylvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians.
Grace unto you: and peace from God our Father and from the Lord
We are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, as it
is fitting, because your faith groweth exceedingly and the charity of
every one of you towards each other aboundeth.
So that we ourselves also glory in you in the churches of God, for
your patience and faith, and in all your persecutions and tribulations:
which you endure
For an example of the just judgment of God, that you may be counted
worthy of the kingdom of God, for which also you suffer.
Seeing it is a just thing with God to repay tribulation to them
that trouble you:
And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with the angels of his power:
In a flame of fire, giving vengeance to them who know not God and
who obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Who shall suffer eternal punishment in destruction, from the face
of the Lord and from the glory of his power:
When he shall come to be glorified in his saints and to be made
wonderful in all them who have believed; because our testimony was
believed upon you in that day.
Wherefore also we pray always for you: That our God would make you
worthy of his vocation and fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness
and the work of faith in power:
That the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you
in him, according to the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
apostle's traditions are to be observed.
And we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
That you be not easily moved from your sense nor be terrified,
neither by spirit nor by word nor by epistle, as sent from us, as if the
day of the Lord were at hand.
Let no man deceive you by any means: for unless there come a revolt
first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition
ancient fathers, of a revolt from the Roman empire, which was first to
be destroyed, before the coming of Antichrist. It may, perhaps, be
understood also of a revolt of many nations from the Catholic Church;
which has, in part, happened already, by means of Mahomet, Luther, &c.,
and it may be supposed, will be more general in the days of the
as is evident from the frequent repetition of the Greek article [ ], the
man of sin, the son of perdition, the adversary or opposer. It agrees to
the wicked and great Antichrist, who will come before the end of the
world.
Who opposeth and is lifted up above all that is called God or that
is worshipped, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself
as if he were God.
rebuild; or in some Christian church, which he will pervert to his own
worship: as Mahomet has done by the churches of the east.
Remember you not that, when I was yet with you, I told you these
things?
And now you know what withholdeth, that he may be revealed in his
time.
For the mystery of iniquity already worketh: only that he who now
holdeth do hold, until he be taken out of the way.
And then that wicked one shall be revealed: whom the Lord Jesus
shall kill with the spirit of his mouth and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming: him
Whose coming is according to the working of Satan, in all power and
signs and lying wonders:
And in all seduction of iniquity to them that perish: because they
receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Therefore
wonders, and false miracles, in punishment of their not entertaining the
love of truth.
That all may be judged who have not believed the truth but have
consented to iniquity.
But we ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren,
beloved of God, for that God hath chosen you firstfruits unto salvation,
in sanctification of the spirit and faith of the truth:
Whereunto also he hath called you by our gospel, unto the
purchasing of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, brethren, stand fast: and hold the traditions, which
you have learned, whether by word or by our epistle.
received than their epistles.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God and our Father, who
hath loved us and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope in
grace,
Exhort your hearts and confirm you in every good work and word.
For the rest, brethren, pray for us that the word of God may run
and may be glorified, even as among you:
And that we may be delivered from importunate and evil men: for all
men have not faith.
But God is faithful, who will strengthen and keep you from evil.
And we have confidence concerning you in the Lord that the things
which we command, you both do and will do.
And the Lord direct your hearts, in the charity of God and the
patience of Christ.
And we charge you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you withdraw yourselves from every brother walking disorderly and
not according to the tradition which they have received of us.
For yourselves know how you ought to imitate us. For we were not
disorderly among you.
Neither did we eat any man's bread for nothing: but in labour and
in toil we worked night and day, lest we should be chargeable to any of
you.
Not as if we had not power: but that we might give ourselves a
pattern unto you, to imitate us.
For also, when we were with you, this we declared to you: that, if
any man will not work, neither let him eat.
For we have heard there are some among you who walk disorderly:
working not at all, but curiously meddling.
Now we charge them that are such and beseech them by the Lord
But you, brethren, be not weary in well doing.
And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man
and do not keep company with him, that he may be ashamed.
Yet do not esteem him as an enemy but admonish him as a brother.
Now the Lord of peace himself give you everlasting peace in every
place. The Lord be with you all.
The salutation of Paul with my own hand: which is the sign in
every epistle. So I write.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
himself and to his charge; and that he ought to be well informed of the
good morals of those on whom he was to impose hands: Impose not hands
lightly upon any man. He tells him also how he should behave towards his
clergy. The Epistle was written about 33 years after our Lord's
opinion is, that it was in Macedonia.
