himself had received.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the commandment of
To Timothy, his beloved son in faith. Grace, mercy and peace, from
As I desired thee to remain at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia,
that thou mightest charge some not to teach otherwise:
Not to give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which furnish
questions rather than the edification of God which is in faith.
Now the end of the commandment is charity from a pure heart, and a
good conscience, and an unfeigned faith.
From which things some, going astray, are turned aside unto vain
babbling:
Desiring to be teachers of the law: understanding neither the
things they say, nor whereof they affirm.
But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
Knowing this: That the law is not made for the just man but for the
unjust and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the wicked
and defiled, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for
manslayers,
evil, not as compelled by the law, and merely for fear of the punishment
appointed for transgressors; but voluntarily, and out of the love of God
and virtue; and would do so, though there were no law.
For fornicators, for them who defile themselves with mankind, for
menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and whatever other thing
is contrary to sound doctrine:
Which is according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God
which hath been committed to my trust.
I give him thanks who hath strengthened me, even to Christ Jesus
our Lord, for that he hath counted me faithful, putting me in the
ministry:
Who before was a blasphemer and a persecutor and contumelious. But
Now the grace of our Lord hath abounded exceedingly with faith and
love, which is in Christ Jesus.
A faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
But for this cause have I obtained mercy: that in me first Christ
shall believe in him unto life everlasting.
Now to the king of ages, immortal, invisible, the only God, be
honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
This precept, I commend to thee, O son Timothy: according to the
prophecies going before on thee, that thou war in them a good warfare,
Having faith and a good conscience, which some rejecting have made
shipwreck concerning the faith.
Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered up to
all. Women are not to teach.
I desire therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers,
intercessions and thanksgivings be made for all men:
For kings and for all that are in high station: that we may lead a
quiet and a peaceable life in all piety and chastity.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour,
Who will have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of
the truth.
For there is one God: and one mediator of God and men, the man
gave himself, as the apostle writes in the following verse.
Who gave himself a redemption for all, a testimony in due times.
a redemption for all.... He is also the only mediator, who stands in
need of no other to recommend his petitions to the Father. But this is
not against our seeking the prayers and intercession, as well of the
faithful upon earth, as of the saints and angels in heaven, for
obtaining mercy, grace, and salvation, through Jesus Christ. As St. Paul
himself often desired the help of the prayers of the faithful, without
any injury to the mediatorship of Jesus Christ.
Whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an apostle (I say the
truth, I lie not), a doctor of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
I will therefore that men pray in every place, lifting up pure
hands, without anger and contention.
In like manner, women also in decent apparel: adorning themselves
with modesty and sobriety, not with plaited hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly attire:
But, as it becometh women professing godliness, with good works.
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.
But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to use authority over the
man: but to be in silence.
For Adam was first formed; then Eve.
And Adam was not seduced; but the woman, being seduced, was in the
transgression.
Yet she shall be saved through child bearing; if she continue in
faith and love and sanctification with sobriety.
pillar of truth.
A faithful saying: If a man desire the office of a bishop, he
desireth good work.
It behoveth therefore a bishop to be blameless, the husband of one
wife, sober, prudent, of good behaviour, chaste, given to hospitality, a
teacher,
(for St. Paul himself had none), but that no one should be admitted to
the holy orders of bishop, priest, or deacon, who had been married more
than once.
Not given to wine, no striker, but modest, not quarrelsome, not
covetous, but
One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in
subjection with all chastity.
But if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
care of the church of God?
Not a neophyte: lest, being puffed up with pride, he fall into the
judgment of the devil.
Moreover, he must have a good testimony of them who are without:
lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
Deacons in like manner: chaste, not double tongued, not given to
much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre:
Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience.
And let these also first be proved: and so let them minister,
having no crime.
The women in like manner: chaste, not slanderers, but sober,
faithful in all things.
Let deacons be the husbands of one wife: who rule well their
children and their own houses.
For they that have ministered well shall purchase to themselves a
good degree and much confidence in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
These things I write to thee, hoping that I shall come to thee
shortly.
But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to
behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living
living God can never uphold error, nor bring in corruptions,
superstition, or idolatry.
And evidently great is the mystery of godliness, which was
manifested in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, appeared unto
angels, hath been preached unto the Gentiles, is believed in the world,
is taken up in glory.
Now the Spirit manifestly saith that in the last times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of error and doctrines of
devils,
Speaking lies in hypocrisy and having their conscience seared,
Forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats, which God hath created
to be received with thanksgiving by the faithful and by them that have
known the truth.
ancient heretics, who absolutely condemned marriage, and the use of all
kind of meat; because they pretended that all flesh was from an evil
principle. Whereas the church of God, so far from condemning marriage,
holds it a holy sacrament; and forbids it to none but such as by vow
have chosen the better part: and prohibits not the use of any meats
whatsoever in proper times and seasons; though she does not judge all
kind of diet proper for days of fasting and penance.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected that
is received with thanksgiving:
For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
These things proposing to the brethren, thou shalt be a good
minister of Christ Jesus, nourished up in the words of faith and of the
good doctrine which thou hast attained unto.
But avoid foolish and old wives fables: and exercise thyself unto
godliness.
For bodily exercise is profitable to little: but godliness is
profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is and of
that which is to come.
A faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.
For therefore we labour and are reviled, because we hope in the
living God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful.
These things command and teach:
Let no man despise thy youth: but be thou an example of the
faithful, in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in chastity.
Till I come, attend unto reading, to exhortation and to doctrine.
Neglect not the grace that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the priesthood.
Meditate upon these things, be wholly in these things: that thy
profiting may be manifest to all.
Take heed to thyself and to doctrine: be earnest in them.  For in
doing this thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee.
clergy.
An ancient man rebuke not, but entreat him as a father: young men,
as brethren:
Old women, as mothers: young women, as sisters, in all chastity.
Honour widows that are widows indeed.
But if any widow have children or grandchildren, let her learn
first to govern her own house and to make a return of duty to her
parents; for this is acceptable before God.
But she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, let her trust in God
and continue in supplications and prayers night and day.
For she that liveth in pleasures is dead while she is living.
And this give in charge, that they may be blameless.
But if any man have not care of his own and especially of those of
his house, he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel.
Let a widow be chosen of no less than threescore years of age, who
hath been the wife of one husband.
Having testimony for her good works, if she have brought up
children, if she have received to harbour, if she have washed the
saints' feet, if she have ministered to them that suffer tribulation,
if she have diligently followed every good work.
But the younger widows avoid. For when they have grown wanton in
Having damnation, because they have made void their first faith.
And withal being idle they learn to go about from house to house:
and are not only idle, but tattlers also and busy bodies, speaking
things which they ought not.
I will, therefore, that the younger should marry, bear children,
be mistresses of families, give no occasion to the adversary to speak
evil.
For some are already turned aside after Satan.
If any of the faithful have widows, let him minister to them, and
let not the church be charged: that there may be sufficient for them
that are widows indeed.
Let the priests that rule well be esteemed worthy of double
honour: especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.
For the scripture saith: Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn: and, The labourer is worthy of his reward.
Against a priest receive not an accusation, but under two or three
witnesses.
Them that sin reprove before all that the rest also may have fear.
I charge thee, before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels,
that thou observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing by
declining to either side.
Impose not hands lightly upon any man, neither be partaker of
other men's sins. Keep thyself chaste.
Do not still drink water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's
sake and thy frequent infirmities.
Some men's sins are manifest, going before to judgment: and some
men they follow after.
In like manner also good deeds are manifest: and they that are
otherwise cannot be hid.
Whosoever are servants under the yoke, let them count their masters
worthy of all honour; lest the name of the Lord and his doctrine be
blasphemed.
But they that have believing masters, let them not despise them,
because they are brethren; but serve them the rather, because they are
faithful and beloved, who are partakers of the benefit. These things
teach and exhort.
If any man teach otherwise and consent not to the sound words of
our Lord Jesus Christ and to that doctrine which is according to
godliness,
He is proud, knowing nothing, but sick about questions and strifes
of words; from which arise envies, contentions, blasphemies, evil
suspicions,
Conflicts of men corrupted in mind and who are destitute of the
truth, supposing gain to be godliness.
But godliness with contentment is great gain.
For we brought nothing into this world: and certainly we can carry
nothing out.
But having food and wherewith to be covered, with these we are
content.
For they that will become rich fall into temptation and into the
snare of the devil and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which
drown men into destruction and perdition.
For the desire of money is the root of all evils; which some
coveting have erred from the faith and have entangled themselves in many
sorrows.
But thou, O man of God, fly these things: and pursue justice,
godliness, faith, charity, patience, mildness.
Fight the good fight of faith. Lay hold on eternal life, whereunto
thou art called and be it confessed a good confession before many
witnesses.
I charge thee before God who quickeneth all things, and before
That thou keep the commandment without spot, blameless, unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Which in his times he shall shew, who is the Blessed and only
Who only hath immortality and inhabiteth light inaccessible: whom
no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and empire everlasting.
Charge the rich of this world not to be highminded nor to trust in
the uncertainty of riches, but in the living God (who giveth us
abundantly all things to enjoy)
To do good, to be rich in good work, to give easily, to
communicate to others,
To lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on the true life.
O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding the
profane novelties of words and oppositions of knowledge falsely so
called.
Which some promising, have erred concerning the faith. Grace be
with thee. Amen.
what belonged to his office, as in the former; and also warns him to
shun the conversation of those who had erred from the truth, describing
at the same time their character, He tells him of his approaching death
and desires him to come speedily to him. It appears from this
circumstance that he wrote this second Epistle in the time of his last
imprisonment at Rome and not long before his martyrdom.
not to be discouraged at his sufferings, but to hold firm the sound
doctrine of the gospel.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, according to
the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus:
To Timothy, my dearly beloved son. Grace, mercy and peace, from God
the Father and from Christ Jesus our Lord.
I give thanks to God, whom I serve from my forefathers, with a pure
conscience, that without ceasing I have a remembrance of thee in my
prayers, night and day.
Desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be
filled with joy:
Calling to mind that faith which is in thee unfeigned, which also
dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois and in thy mother Eunice, and I am
certain that in thee also.
For which cause I admonish thee that thou stir up the grace of God
which is in thee by the imposition of my hands.
For God hath not given us the spirit of fear: but of power and of
love and of sobriety.
Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of
me his prisoner: but labour with the gospel, according to the power of
Who hath delivered us and called us by his holy calling, not
according to our own works, but according to his own purpose and grace,
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the times of the world:
But is now made manifest by the illumination of our Saviour Jesus
incorruption by the gospel.
our Saviour.
Wherein I am appointed a preacher and an apostle and teacher of
the Gentiles.
For which cause, I also suffer these things: but I am not ashamed.
that which I have committed unto him, against that day.
Hold the form of sound words which thou hast heard of me: in faith
and in the love which is in Christ Jesus.
Keep the good thing committed to thy trust by the Holy Ghost who
dwelleth in us.
Thou knowest this, that all they who are in Asia are turned away
from me: of whom are Phigellus and Hermogenes.
The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus: because he hath
often refreshed me and hath not been ashamed of my chain:
But when he was come to Rome, he carefully sought me and found me.
The Lord grant unto him to find mercy of the Lord in that day. And
in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou very well
knowest.
danger of the delusions of heretics.
Thou therefore, my son, be strong in Christ Jesus:
And the things which thou hast heard of me by many witnesses, the
same commend to faithful men who shall be fit to teach others also.
Labour as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
No man, being a soldier to God, entangleth himself with secular
businesses: that he may please him to whom he hath engaged himself.
For he also that striveth for the mastery is not crowned, except he
strive lawfully.
The husbandman that laboureth must first partake of the fruits.
Understand what I say: for the Lord will give thee in all things
understanding.
Be mindful that the Lord Jesus Christ is risen again from the dead,
of the seed of David, according to my gospel:
Wherein I labour even unto bands, as an evildoer. But the word of
Therefore I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that they
also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with heavenly
glory.
A faithful saying: for if we be dead with him, we shall live also
with him.
If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. If we deny him, he
will also deny us.
If we believe not, he continueth faithful, he cannot deny himself.
Of these things put them in mind, charging them before the Lord.
the hearers.
Carefully study to present thyself approved unto God, a workman
that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth.
But shun profane and vain babblings: for they grow much towards
ungodliness.
And their speech spreadeth like a canker: of whom are Hymeneus and
Who have erred from the truth, saying that the resurrection is
past already, and have subverted the faith of some.
But the sure foundation of God standeth firm, having this seal:
the Lord knoweth who are his; and let every one depart from iniquity who
nameth the name of the Lord.
But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of
silver, but also of wood and of earth: and some indeed unto honour, but
some unto dishonour.
If any man therefore shall cleanse himself from these, he shall be
a vessel unto honour, sanctified and profitable to the Lord, prepared
unto every good work.
But flee thou youthful desires, and pursue justice, faith, charity
and peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
And avoid foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they beget
strifes.
But the servant of the Lord must not wrangle: but be mild toward
all men, apt to teach, patient,
With modesty admonishing them that resist the truth: if
peradventure God may give them repentance to know the truth;
And they may recover themselves from the snares of the devil by
whom they are held captive at his will.
constancy. Of the great profit of the knowledge of the scriptures.
Know also this, that in the last days shall come dangerous times.
Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, haughty, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, wicked,
Without affection, without peace, slanderers, incontinent,
unmerciful, without kindness,
Traitors, stubborn, puffed up, and lovers of pleasure more than of
Having an appearance indeed of godliness but denying the power
thereof. Now these avoid.
For of these sort are they who creep into houses and lead captive
silly women laden with sins, who are led away with divers desires:
Ever learning, and never attaining to the knowledge of the truth.
Now as Jannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so these also resist the
truth, men corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith.
But they shall proceed no farther: for their folly shall be
manifest to all men, as theirs also was.
But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose,
faith, longsuffering, love, patience,
Persecutions, afflictions: such as came upon me at Antioch, at
the Lord delivered me.
And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.
But evil men and seducers shall grow worse and worse: erring, and
driving into error,
But continue thou in those things which thou hast learned and
which have been committed to thee. Knowing of whom thou hast learned
them:
And because from thy infancy thou hast known the holy scriptures
which can instruct thee to salvation by the faith which is in Christ
All scripture, inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to
reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice:
for all these ends. But, if we would have the whole rule of Christian
faith and practice, we must not be content with those Scriptures, which
nor yet with the New Testament, without taking along with it the
traditions of the apostles, and the interpretation of the church, to
which the apostles delivered both the book, and the true meaning of it.
That the man of God may be perfect, furnished to every good work.
him to come to him.
I charge thee, before God and Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
living and the dead, by his coming and his kingdom:
Preach the word: be instant in season, out of season: reprove,
entreat, rebuke in all patience and doctrine.
For there shall be a time when they will not endure sound doctrine
but, according to their own desires, they will heap to themselves
teachers having itching ears:
And will indeed turn away their hearing from the truth, but will be
turned unto fables.
But be thou vigilant, labour in all things, do the work of an
evangelist, fulfil thy ministry. Be sober.
For I am even now ready to be sacrificed: and the time of my
dissolution is at hand.
I have fought a good fight: I have finished my course: I have kept
the faith.
As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice which
the Lord the just judge will render to me in that day: and not only to
me, but to them also that love his coming. Make haste to come to me
quickly.
For Demas hath left me, loving this world, and is gone to
Crescens into Galatia, Titus into Dalmatia.
Only Luke is with me. Take Mark and bring him with thee: for he is
profitable to me for the ministry.
But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.
The cloak that I left at Troas, with Carpus, when thou comest,
bring with thee: and the books, especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith hath done me much evil: the Lord will
reward him according to his works:
Whom do thou also avoid: for he hath greatly withstood our words.
At my first answer, no man stood with me: but all forsook me.  May
it not be laid to their charge!
But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that by me the
preaching may be accomplished and that all the Gentiles may hear.  And I
was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
The Lord hath delivered me from every evil work and will preserve
me unto his heavenly kingdom. To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
Salute Prisca, and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus.
Erastus remained at Corinth. And Trophimus I left sick at Miletus.
Make haste to come before winter. Eubulus and Pudens and Linus and
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you.
his beloved disciple and companion, Titus, bishop, and left him there to
finish the work which he had begun. Afterwards the Apostle, on a journey
to Nicopolis, a city of Macedonia, wrote this Epistle to Titus, in which
he directs him to ordain bishops and priests for the different cities,
shewing him the principal qualities necessary for a bishop. He also
gives him particular advice for his own conduct to his flock, exhorting
him to hold to strictness of discipline, but seasoned with lenity. It
was written about thirty-three years after our Lord's Ascension.
